The two-step flow of communication model says that most people form their opinions under the influence of opinion leaders, who in turn are influenced by the mass media. In contrast to the one-step flow of the hypodermic needle model or magic bullet theory, which holds that people are directly influenced by mass media, according to the two-step flow model, ideas flow from mass media to opinion leaders, and from them to a wider population. Opinion leaders pass on their own interpretation of information in addition to the actual media content. The theory is based on a The two-step model says that most people are not directly influenced by mass media, and instead form their opinions based on opinion leaders who interpret media messages and put them into context. Opinion leaders are those initially exposed to a specific media content, and who interpret it based on their own opinion. They then begin to infiltrate these opinions through the general public who become "opinion followers".  These "opinion leaders" gain their influence through more elite media as opposed to mainstream mass media.  In this process, social influence is created and adjusted by the ideals and opinions of each specific "elite media" group, and by these media group's opposing ideals and opinions and in combination with popular mass media sources. Therefore, the leading influence in these opinions is primarily a social persuasion.  The two-step flow of communication model hypothesizes that ideas flow from mass media to opinion leaders, and from them to a wider population. It was first introduced by sociologist Paul Lazarsfeld et al. in For example, in the field of science communication, Matthew Nisbet describes the use of opinion leaders as intermediaries between scientists and the public as a way to reach the public via trained individuals who are more closely engaged with their communities, such as "teachers, business leaders, attorneys, policymakers, neighborhood leaders, students, and media professionals." Examples of initiatives that take this approach include Science & Engineering Ambassadors, sponsored by the National Academy of Sciences, and Science Booster Clubs, coordinated by the National Center for Science Education.  According to Lazarsfeld and Katz, mass media information is channeled to the "masses" through opinion leadership. The people with most access to media, and having a more literate understanding of media content, explain and diffuse the content to others.  Based on the two-step flow hypothesis, the term "personal influence" came to illustrate the process intervening between the media's direct message and the audience's reaction to that message. Opinion leaders tend to be similar to those they influence—based on personality, interests, demographics, or socio-economic factors. These leaders tend to influence others to change their attitudes and behaviors. The two-step theory refined the ability to predict how media messages influence audience behavior and explains why certain media campaigns do not alter audiences' attitudes. This hypothesis provided a basis for the two-step flow theory of mass communication.  In the times of digital social media, the more than six decade old theory sparks much new interest. The fact that massive databases are being used to send tailor-made messages to individuals leads back to the idea of a "one-step flow of communication".  The idea is a kind of Hypodermic needle / magic bullet model, with the capacity of big data analytics informed mass customization. Empirical studies by other scholars, in contrast, have found that modern social media platforms, like Twitter, exhibit clear evidence of a two-step flow of communication.   Many social media users obtain their news from celebrities or other amplifying opinion leaders, who again get informed by mass media or by individuals with specific insights. The fine-grained digital footprint of social media also suggests that there are more than simply the one-step and two-step modes of communication flow, leading the search for more complex Multistep Flow Models based on distinct network structures.   A study done on the Annang people of Akwa Ibom State, Nigeria defined how mass media has changed the role of traditional leaders regarding the two-step flow theory. The study showed that mass media creates awareness, but does not cause people to change their thoughts or actions. The study displayed that people hear information from the media, but rely on their opinion leaders to verify and provide context.  The emergence of mass media has not made opinion leaders obsolete. Instead, it has changed the role that opinion leaders play. Opinion leaders and mass media work together to inform people.  Paul Lazarsfeld and Elihu Katz are considered to be the founders of functional theory and their book Personal Influence ( One of the first to embark on Communications research was the first to introduce the difference between 'administrative research' and 'critical research' in regards to the media. Critical research he believed, criticizes the media institutions themselves for the perspective ways they serve dominant social groups. Critical research favors interperspective and inductive methods of inquiry.   Lazarsfeld's study of the Elihu Katz was a psychologist in the School for Communication at the University of Pennsylvania when he collaborated with Lazarsfeld in "... the traditional image of the mass persuasion process must make room for 'people' as intervening factors between the stimuli of the media and resultant opinions, decisions, and actions."  The presidential election of Lazarsfeld, Berelson, and Gaudet broke the respondents into groups of 600. Lazarsfeld and his team interviewed three groups once more following the initial interview. They interviewed the other group each month, May-November. The team used the monthly interview to monitor what media the people were consuming and if their voting decision changed. The study found that people were more likely to have conversations about politics with those around them than to consume political media. These conversations were more likely to sway voters than the political press was. Communication with community members seems reliable since the people are trusted.  This observation led to the idea of the two-step flow theory.  They focused on what factors would influence their decisions as the campaign progressed. The People's Choice, a book based on this study presented the theory of "the two-step flow of communications", which later came to be associated with the so-called "limited effects model" of mass media: the idea that ideas often flow from radio and print to local "opinion leaders" who in turn pass them on to those with more limited political knowledge, or "opinion followers." The results of the research led to the conclusion that sometimes person to person communication can be more effective than traditional media outlets such as newspapers, TV, radio etc. This idea developed further in the book Personal Influence.  In The original two-step flow hypothesis—that ideas flow from the media to opinion leaders and then to less active sections of the population—has been criticised. In Everett Rogers' "Diffusion of Innovations" cites one study in which two-thirds of respondents accredited their awareness to the mass media rather than face-to-face communication. Similarly, critics argue that most of Lazarsfeld's findings pertain to learning factors involved with general media habits rather than the learning of particular information.   However, Lazarsfeld's two-step hypothesis is an adequate description to understand the media's influence on belief and behavior. Troldahl finds that media exposure is a first step to introduce discussion, at which point opinion leaders initiate the second-step flow.  According to Hilbert today's digital media landscape simultaneously facilitate one-step, two-step and more complex multi-step flow models of communication.  For example, in Twitter networks it is no contradiction that average Twitter users mainly mention intermediating opinion leaders in their tweets (two-step flow), while at the same time traditional mass media outlets receive 80-90 % of their mentions directly through a direct one-step flow from the same users.  Another criticism is that people have raised concerns about credit not being entirely given where it is due. According to Esperanza Herrero, women played a significant role in developing the Two-Step Flow theory. A woman named Joan Doris Goldhamer testified that she vividly remembers how she and several other women were calculating percentages, collecting data, and handling technical work. They also conducted many detailed and well-structured interviews and assisted in interpreting the information they helped gather for the theory.  Prior to the Two-Step Flow Theory, there was the Magic Bullet or Hypodermic Needle Theory. It emerged in the mid- On the contrary, in recent years, a new theory based on the Two-Step Flow Theory has emerged—the Multi-Step Flow Theory. It is said to have been developed by the same scholars behind the Two-Step Flow Theory, sociologists Elihu Katz and Paul Lazarsfeld. Like the Two-Step Flow Theory, the Multi-Step Flow Theory describes how media messages are disseminated through intermediaries. However, some key differences exist while the Two-Step Flow Theory is linear, the Multi-Step Flow Theory is more complex. Additionally, the Multi-Step Flow Theory is part of a larger network of information and acknowledges audience participation. However, it has a much weaker direct influence compared to the Two-Step Flow Theory.  The multi-step flow theory is seen heavily on platforms such as TikTok. Social media platforms allow people to gain a following and become opinion leaders of small groups of people. The fact that so many small opinion leaders can exist has shifted how the two-step flow theory works into a multi-step flow theory.  The existence of algorithms has created echo chambers, which allow misinformation to spread quickly through demographics that are only seeing the content that they want to see. 