In some parliamentary systems (e.g., in Canada and the United Kingdom), politicians are said to cross the floor if they formally change their political affiliation to a political party different from the one they were initially elected under. In Australia, this term simply refers to Members of Parliament (MPs) who dissent from the party line and vote against the express instructions of the party whip while retaining membership in their political party.[a] Voting against party lines may lead to consequences such as losing a position (e.g., as minister or a portfolio critic) or being ejected from the party caucus. While these practices are legally permissible in most countries, crossing the floor can lead to controversy and media attention. Some countries like Malaysia, Pakistan, India,[1] Indonesia, the Maldives and Bangladesh[2] have laws that remove a member from parliament due to floor-crossing. The term originates from the British House of Commons, which is configured with the Government and Opposition facing each other on rows of benches. In consequence, MPs who switch from the governing party to one in opposition (or vice versa) also change which side of the chamber on which they sit. A notable example of this is Winston Churchill, who crossed the floor from the Conservatives to the Liberals in The Australia meaning on the other hand arises from the way divisions—roll call votes—are conducted.[3] In Australian chambers, members move to the government benches (on the presiding officer's right) to vote in favor of a motion, and the opposition benches (on the presiding officer's left) to vote against a motion. Therefore, an MP who crosses the floor is on the opposite side of the chamber from the rest of their party, and on government motions frequently on the opposite side of the chamber than they normally sit. In Nigeria, the term "crossing the carpet" or "carpet crossing" is used.[4] In India, a similar expression is "Aaya Ram Gaya Ram", referring to political floor-crossing.[5] In the United Kingdom and Canada, crossing the floor means leaving one's party entirely and joining another caucus. For example, leaving an opposition party to support the government (or vice versa), leaving or being expelled from the party one ran with at election and sitting as a clear[note 1] independent, or even leaving one opposition party to join another. In both countries, the term carries only this meaning, not simply voting against the party line on a bill. In April An extraordinary example occurred in Alberta, Canada, in December In some countries, the phrase "crossing the floor" describes members of a government party or parties who defect by voting with the opposition against some piece of government-sponsored legislation. Political parties commonly allow their members a free vote on some matters of personal conscience. In Australia, one of the major parties, the Australian Labor Party requires members to pledge their support for the collective decisions of the caucus,[13] which theoretically prohibits them from "crossing the floor" in this sense; however, in practice, some Labor members disregard this pledge, despite the disciplinary action which may result. Senator Fatima Payman was elected to the Senate with the Labor Party in Among other parties, crossing the floor is rare, although then Senator Barnaby Joyce of the National Party of Australia crossed the floor 28 times.[15] Tasmanian Senator Sir Reg Wright voted against his own party, the Liberal Party of Australia, on 150 occasions, which has been claimed as a record for this form of crossing the floor in the Australian Parliament. By convention in Australia, members of the government and shadow ministries are bound to vote as per the party room line and when they fail to do so, they are expected to resign or offer to resign from their ministry position. This results in a situation where crossing the floor as a Minister or Shadow Minister has become viewed as a lack of confidence in whoever the current leader happens to be. In