Geoheritage (a blend of geological and heritage) is the geological aspect of natural and cultural heritage. A geosite is a particular geological heritage asset. It is a heritage category comparable to other forms of natural heritage, such as biodiversity. The first reference to geoheritage as such was at a The term geological heritage was first mentioned at the First International Symposium on the Conservation of our Geological Heritage at Digne, France in Conceptually, geoheritage derives from various writings of Busby et al. In Sharples In Sadry "Geoheritage encompasses global, national, statewide, and local features of geology, at all scales that are intrinsically important sites or culturally important sites offering information or insights into the evolution of the Earth; or into the history of science, or that can be used for research, teaching, or reference."[9] The definition of geoheritage is based on the Regulation of the Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources of the Republic of Indonesia No.1 of "Geotourism is a knowledge -based tourism, an interdisciplinary integration of the tourism industry with conservation and interpretation of abiotic nature attributes, besides considering related cultural issues, within the geosites for the general public."[11] It is seen around the world through the growth of geoparks as well as independently in many natural and urban areas where tourism’s focus is on the geological environment. In Australia, the term geoheritage appeared initially in Bradbury ( In Australia there are sites which have natural features (such as Fossil Hill at Cliefden Caves, NSW); cultural features (such as the site of the discovery of the first limestone in inland Australia at Cliefden Caves); scenically important sites such as the Three Sisters in the Blue Mountains, of New South Wales, Australia; and indigenous culturally important sites such as Uluru in the Northern Territory. The Geological Agency of the Indonesian Energy and Resources Ministry has declared nine geological sites in the province of Yogyakarta in Indonesia.[14] These are: In Sleman Regency: In Bantul Regency: In Kulon Progo Regency: In Gunung Kidul Regency: The Geological Society of Spain and the Geological and Mining Institute of Spain have produced a list of internationally important geosites (sites of geological interest known as LIGS in Spanish). This work, which began in Teide volcano, Tenerife, has been designated a World Heritage Site in part for its geological interest. Some other WHSs in Spain are of geological interest, but were selected for other features. For example, Spain has one of the two sites of the WHS Heritage of Mercury. Almadén and Idrija. However, the criteria by which Almadén was assessed by UNESCO relate to its mining heritage rather than geological interest. With its diversified lithology, dissected landscapes and rock churches, there is a large amount of geoheritage in Ethiopia. Among the better documented geosites there is the Zeyi cave in Dogu'a Tembien.[16]