A delaying tactic or delay tactic is a strategic device sometimes used during business, diplomatic or interpersonal negotiations, litigation and other circumstances, in which one party seeks to gain an advantage by postponing an action or decision.[1][2] Someone uses a delaying tactic when they expect to have a stronger negotiating position at a later time. They may also use a delaying tactic when they prefer the status quo to any of the potential resolutions, or to impose costs on the other party to compel them to accept a settlement or compromise.[3] Delay tactics are also sometimes used as a form of indirect refusal wherein one party postpones a decision indefinitely rather than refusing a negotiation outright.[4] To use a delaying tactic, the delaying party must have some form of control over the decision-making process.[5] Delaying tactics can be employed, either intentionally or subconsciously, as a coping mechanism to avoid making difficult decisions or performing unpleasant tasks.[6] The reasons that an individual may use delay tactics may vary, but motivations often include maintaining control and avoiding change; especially when this change is unwanted. By delaying a decision, the individual avoids committing to a course of action that could lead to limited autonomy or feelings of loss of control.[7] This kind of delay tactic is often seen as a fear of commitment, when an individual would rather remain undecided than to commit to any specific option available to them. A closely related phenomenon is opportunity cost, wherein an individual is unwilling to forgo other available options to commit to one. Delay tactics can also be the result of denial if an individual is unwilling to accept any of the available options, especially when choosing between multiple negative outcomes.[8] An individual may delay making a decision in the hope that a better option will become available or that the decision will be made for them by others or by changing circumstances. Delay tactics and indecision can be a symptom of mild to severe mental disorders such as depression and anxiety.[9] Delaying and indecision can also be the result of fear of making a poor choice. This can stem from an obsessive desire to identify the optimal solution by gathering more information. This can result in the decision being postponed indefinitely, especially in situations where some degree of uncertainty is unavoidable.[10] This can be further exacerbated if the individual has trauma associated with the consequences of their past decisions.[11] Delaying tactics are a part of the body's natural response to perceived threats. Freezing is an automatic, involuntary response to fear. This tactic delays other responses, allowing for more time to process the situation and gather information before taking any action.[12] Freezing may also occur when neither fight or flight is an available option.[13] If there is no decision to make, freezing is not a delaying tactic.