In engineering, a bug is a design defect in an engineered system—such as software, computer hardware, electronics, circuitry or machinery—that causes an undesired result. Defects outside the scope of design, such as a server crash due to a natural disaster, are not bugs, nor do bugs occur in natural systems such as the weather. Bug is a non-technical term; more formal terms, besides defect, are error, flaw, and fault. Bugs may be persistent, sporadic, intermittent, or transient; in computing, crashes, freezes, and glitches are types of bugs. Since desirability is subjective, what is undesirable to one may be desirable to another, hence the often comical rejoinder occasionally offered to the report of a bug, "It's not a bug, it's a feature." The Middle English word bugge is the basis for the terms bugbear and bugaboo as terms used for a monster.[1] The term bug to describe a defect has been engineering jargon since at least as far back as the It has been just so in all of my inventions. The first step is an intuition, and comes with a burst, then difficulties arise—this thing gives out and [it is] then that "Bugs"—as such little faults and difficulties are called—show themselves and months of intense watching, study and labor are requisite before commercial success or failure is certainly reached.[2] In a comic strip printed in a Baffle Ball, the first mechanical pinball game, was advertised as being "free of bugs" in Problems with military gear during World War II were referred to as bugs or glitches.[5] In the In a book published in Isaac Asimov used the term bug to relate to issues with a robot in his short story "Catch That Rabbit," published in U.S. Navy Rear Adm. Grace Hopper, a computer pioneer, popularized a story about a moth that caused a problem in an early electromechanical computer.[7] While Hopper was working on the Mark II and Mark III as Harvard faculty in about [8] Reportedly, the operators, including William "Bill" Burke, later of the Naval Weapons Laboratory, Dahlgren, Virginia,[9] were familiar with the engineering term and probably making a pun by conflating the two meanings of bug (biological and technical). Even if a joke, the story indicates that the term was commonly used in the computer field at that time.[10][11][12][13] The log book, complete with moth, is part of the collection of the Smithsonian National Museum of American History.[12] The related term debug also appears to predate its usage in computing: the Oxford English Dictionary's etymology of the word contains an attestation from Since bug implies undesirable behavior, calling out a bug is subjective. What some find a bug others may find a useful feature, hence the familiar phrase, "It's not a bug, it's a feature" (INABIAF).[15] This quip is recorded in The Jargon File ( Such behavior may be explicitly communicated to users or remain undocumented.