Gastronationalism or culinary nationalism is the use of food and its history, production, control, preparation and consumption as a way of promoting nationalism and national identity. It may involve arguments between two or more regions or countries about whether a particular dish or preparation is claimed by one of those regions or countries and has been appropriated or co-opted by the others. Gastronationalism has been criticized as an example of banal nationalism. Atsuko Ichijo and Ronald Ranta have called food "fundamentally political" and "one of the essential commodities with which political powers at various levels are concerned". : 1–2 Food historian Michelle T. King suggests that cuisine is a natural focus for studies of nationalism, pointing out dozens of such treatments over the first decades of the 21st century. : 1 She also argues Asia's culinary nationalism has been particularly intense. : 1 Examples of gastronationalism include efforts by state bodies, nongovernmental bodies, businesses and business groups, and individuals. : 121–124 New York University professor Fabio Parasecoli has defined food as an expression of identity.  Conflict between two or more regions or countries about whether a particular dish or preparation is claimed by one of those regions or countries and has been appropriated or co-opted by the others is not uncommon, especially in areas where there has been violent conflict. Dishes affected by these culinary wars tend to be those with "a clearly symbolic ethnic significance".  They also tend to be dishes that "represent territorial aspirations" and can be developed and prepared only by settled – and therefore indigenous – peoples.  Lavash and harissa are wheat-based, therefore cannot have been developed by nomads but only by an agricultural society.  Many of the debates center around the idea that a "settled" society – that is, an agricultural rather than nomadic one – is somehow superior, and that claiming a dish only achievable in an agricultural society helps prove the area was agricultural at a certain point.  This idea was official policy in the Soviet Union. [verification needed] According to OpenDemocracy, "evidence of ancient agricultural development is cherished by nationalists on both sides."  Mary Douglas said "national food cultures become a blinding fetish which, if disregarded, may be as dangerous as an explosion".  In Sociologist Michaela DeSoucey in Kingston University's Ranta in In In Food historian King differentiates between gastronationalism, or culinary nationalism, and national cuisine, saying that culinary nationalism "suggests a dynamic process of creation and contestation" while national cuisine "calls to mind a specific and static product". : 3 According to Barca, gastronationalism is used as a political symbol for a party or movement's values, and in particular traditional or populist values. She argues "The passage from fork to defence of traditional values is short", quoting Matteo Salvini saying the "defence of our products is a battle of civilisation: in politics everything can be negotiated, but here Made in Italy either is or is not" and called tortellini made without pork an erasure of "our history".  According to Fino, "national gastronomic identity becomes an occasion for belonging, opposition to others, a claim to superiority".  When the Czech Republic entered the European Union, controversies developed over traditional Czech foods, such as the Czech style of goulash, which traditionally is allowed to rest unchilled overnight before serving, a step forbidden in commercial production by European Union food-handling rules; pomazánkové máslo, which in Czech is "spread butter" but which by EU standards has a fat content too low to be called butter; and the Czech style of rum, which because it is potato-based cannot be called rum under EU rules; conservative politicians objected that entering the EU was removing these foods from traditional cuisine.   According to Boróka Parászka, writing in Hvg, Hungarian politicians regularly use food to "invoke identity", citing as an example Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán's frequent discussion and images of cooking and food in his communications.  The Codex Alimentarius Commission is a project of the Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Health Organization which creates advice regarding food handling, labeling, and ethical standards, including those around marketing a food as originating in a certain place. : 122–124 In some cases United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has made statements favoring one side or the other of such an argument, sometimes after being asked to name a food to a UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage list for a country, which has increased passions on either side.  : 147–157 In In Europe, mandatory origin labeling is "one of the most prickly topics" in European Union (EU) policy discussions.  In December Azerbaijan's National Culinary Centre, a non-governmental organization (NGO) publishes information discussing Azerbaijan's national cuisine and accusing Armenian cuisine of imitating Azerbaijan.  The NGO's CEO said, "Since During the hummus wars, multiple corporations and business groups became involved as part of their marketing campaigns. : 121–123 Colombia and Venezuela have a "heated and longstanding rivalry" over the origins of the arepa.  The dish is a staple of both cuisines. Venezuelan president Nicolás Maduro "has tried to use arepas as a nationalist rallying point, if not a political tool, claiming the food is from his country alone", according to the New York Times.  According to food anthropologist Ocarina Castillo of the Central University of Venezuela, the dish is likely thousands of years old and originated in the region now occupied by the two countries before colonizers of the area drew borders.  Borscht is believed to have originated in Kievan Rus' and specifically in the area of modern-day Ukraine,  but according to historian Alison K. Smith, the dish's "Ukrainian origins have been largely obscured" as it became ubiquitous in Russian cuisine. : 30, 33, 45–47 The dish was described in Sergei Drukovtsov's Cooking Notes ( In In response, Ukraine applied for the inclusion of borscht in the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage List   and launched a five-year culinary diplomacy strategy dubbed 'borsch diplomacy' where borscht plays a central role.  UNESCO added the soup to the organization's list for Ukraine in Shortly after the Taiwan has presented Taiwanese cuisine as the only remnant of traditional Chinese culture and cuisine, which the Nationalist Party argued had "been destroyed on the Chinese Mainland after the Communist takeover". : 56–72 On the other hand, some Taiwanese object to the politically fraught inclusion of Taiwanese cuisine under the banner of regional Chinese cuisine and argue that it is "inaccurate".  In Shanghainese people have criticized the Taiwanese restaurant chain Din Tai Fung of misrepresenting the xiao long bao as a Taiwanese dish.  In October Dolma or tolma is claimed by both Armenia and Azerbaijan.  Armenia holds an annual tolma festival, always at a site that has historical significance in its conflicts with Azerbaijan.  Both Nicaragua and Costa Rica claim gallo pinto as their own, and the dish's origin is a point of contention between the two countries.     The competition between the two countries over ownership of the dish is sometimes referred to as the "Gallo Pinto War".  Falafel is argued over by Israel and various Arab states; according to Jennie Ebeling, writing in the Review of Middle East Studies, the dish "is loaded with issues of national identity".  According to Alexander Lee, writing for History Today in The dish features prominently in Israeli cuisine and has been called a national dish.  Some Palestinians and other Arabs have objected to the identification of falafel with Israeli cuisine as amounting to cultural appropriation. Palestinian author Reem Kassis wrote that the food has become a proxy for political conflict.   Joseph Massad, a Jordanian-American professor at Columbia University, has called the characterization as Israeli of falafel and other dishes of Arab origin in American and European restaurants to be part of a broader issue of appropriation by colonizers.  The dish and its politico-cultural significance were the subject of a In Until Foie gras has been protected as a name and signifier of traditional identity by France; conflict is common with animal rights activists.  Hainanese chicken rice is claimed by both Malaysia and Singapore. The conflict dates to Harissa is claimed by both Armenia and Turkey, where it is called keshkek.  Keshkek was recognized by UNESCO on its intangible cultural heritage list, which has caused passionate debate, with Armenians arguing that the dish's main ingredient, wheat, indicates it could not have been developed in Turkey, where the tradition was nomadic.   Hummus is argued over by Israel, Palestine, Syria, and Lebanon.    The disagreement is sometimes referred to as the "hummus wars". : 3  : 121–123 The hummus wars also refers to the creation by Sabra, a US food company, of "the world's largest hummus plate" as a marketing event. : 121–123 Israeli company Osem responded with a larger hummus plate, and soon was followed by a group of Lebanese chefs working with the Association of Lebanese Industrialists's campaign "Hands Off Our Dishes", which claimed hummus as Lebanese and objected to the marketing of the dish as Israeli. : 121–123 Fadi Abboud, then president of ALI and later tourism minister for the country, threatened legal action against Israel for marketing hummus and other commercial food products as Israeli. : 121–123 A series of record-breaking hummus plates followed from various middle eastern countries. : 121–123 Abboud characterized the hummus wars as being not about just hummus but about "the organized theft carried out by Israel" in connection to the culture of the entire Arab region. : 121–123 Various academic theories argue the dish has its origins in Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, or Egypt.  However, the earliest mention of Hummus comes from a 13th-century cookbook written by the Syrian historian Ibn al-Adim. The strongest evidence currently points to Syria as the origin of Hummus.  West African countries typically have at least one variant form of jollof rice, with Ghana, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Cameroon particularly competitive as to which country makes the best jollof.  In the mid- The rivalry is especially prominent between Nigeria and Ghana.    In Of particular sensitivity in jollof-making communities is the inclusion of non-traditional ingredients, which are defined country to country and are seen as making the jollof inauthentic.   In Both South Korea and North Korea claim kimchi. : xii North Korea argues that South Korea's decreasing consumption (and increasing commercialization of production) is proof that the dish is more strongly associated with North Korea. : xii Traditional kimchi-making in South Korea in Japan also has interested itself in kimchi, arguing with South Korea over the Codex Alimentarius Commission's (CAC) international standardization of the dish, a disagreement often called the kimchi war. : 81–82  : 123 Japan produced and exported an instant version of kimchi, which South Korea argued should not be called kimchi due to the lack of fermentation. : 81–82 During the China has also claimed kimchi, which in China is called pao cai, which is also the name of a similar traditional Sechuan pickle.   In South Korea has called out as appropriation both the Japanese and Chinese marketing of the dish. : 123 Lavash is claimed by Armenia, Azerbaijan and Turkey; the Armenians argue that lavash is traditionally prepared in a tonir, which indicates development in a non-nomadic society such as Armenia.  Accusations in Armenian media centered around Turkey and Azerbaijan claiming the dish because they wanted to conceal their early nomadic lifestyle.  Nasi Lemak is a traditional dish in Southeast Asian cuisine.  It is claimed by both Malaysia and Singapore.  Shopska salad, which is considered a national dish of Bulgaria, is claimed by Bulgaria, Croatia, Czechia, North Macedonia, and Serbia.    Bulgaria requested protected geographical indication from the European Union; Serbia objected.  During Mexico's tortilla riots, protesters chanted, "tortillas si, pan no!", expressing their nationalistic objection to replacing tortillas, with which they identified on a nationalistic level, with bread, which they saw as a colonialist introduction. : 2  [better source needed] UNESCO has included Turkish coffee in its list of items of Intangible Cultural Heritage. : 14 The style of coffee is also claimed by Greece.     Washoku, a traditional food culture of the Japanese, was in