Gigabit Multimedia Serial Link, commonly referred to as GMSL, is a serial link technology that is used for video distribution in cars. It was developed by Maxim Integrated. Maxim Integrated was acquired by Analog Devices[1][2] in GMSL is an asymmetric, full duplex SerDes technology - which means that it transports data at a high rate in the downlink (or forward) direction, while simultaneously transporting a lower data rate in the uplink (or reverse) direction. It transports power, bidirectional control data, Ethernet, bidirectional audio and multiple streams of unidirectional video[3] simultaneously over a single coaxial cable or shielded twisted pair cable.[4] A GMSL serializer receives video from a standard digital video interface such as HDMI, DisplayPort, Camera Serial Interface (CSI-2) or Display Serial Interface (DSI) and can transmit it over a cable of up to 15 m in length.[5] The data is received by a GMSL deserializer that can output it on another standard digital video interface. GMSL video transport may be unprotected or encrypted using HDCP.[6] High resolution flat-panel displays in vehicles started becoming a standard part of in-car entertainment systems in early As increasing display resolutions and camera resolutions were adopted by the automotive industry, there was a need to transport higher video data rates in automotive video systems. The second generation of GMSL, known as GMSL2 with data rate up to 6 Gbit/s became available in The 3rd generation GMSL devices (GMSL3) became available in GMSL is primarily used in In-Vehicle Infotainment (IVI) systems and Advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS) in vehicles. In IVI systems, GMSL links connect displays, such as electronic instrument clusters, navigation systems, center console displays, and rear seat entertainment displays to the vehicle’s head-unit. The full-duplex nature of the link allows transport of video, touch and haptics information, audio and display control, simultaneously over the same cable. In ADAS systems, GMSL links are used to connect cameras to electronic control units. Examples of such cameras are backup cameras, surround view cameras, blind spot monitor cameras, forward-looking cameras and driver monitoring cameras. The GMSL link provides camera power, camera control, fault reporting and video transport across a single, coaxial cable. ADAS systems are considered safety-critical systems, and typically have an Automotive Safety Integrity Level (ASIL) rating, specified according to the ISO There are other uses for GMSL in the vehicle. Examples include control data distribution for adaptive driving beam headlights,[8] transport of radar and lidar data in autonomous vehicles, and video data transport between domain controllers in a vehicle. For example, surround view camera data can be transported from the ADAS domain controller to the head unit to be displayed to the driver. Automotive electronics must operate in an environment with extreme temperatures, high levels of electrical crosstalk and transients. GMSL devices must meet or exceed the requirements of the AEC-Q100 automotive reliability standard for integrated circuits, and the ISO At the AutoSens conference in Brussels in