The gender power gap is defined as the proportional power held by women in leadership and management positions relative to men (such as the gap in top executive positions).  This measurement distinguishes itself from gender diversity, which only measures the presence of women at the top table. Instead, gender power gap specifically focuses on the value and number of top executive women, who hold decision-making power and authority in the institutions they work for. Executive positions held by women, typically as chief human resources officer, tend to have a fraction of the authority of male executives. Similarly in politics, women tend to be assigned roles which deal with family and other social issues, whereas men are assigned to tackle economic and structural developmental challenges.   According to UN secretary general, Antonio Guterres, who coined the term, the gender power gap that exists in societies, cultures and political systems is also present in economies and corporations.  According to a The term gender power gap was coined in March The Canadian publication The Globe and Mail echoed Guterres' view in its The gender power gap webinar hosted by gender data company ExecuShe and UN Women's Women's Empowerment Principles, highlighted that certain executive positions hold more power than others. For example, a CEO from a technology company typically holds 56% of decision-making power, while the CFO holds 12%, the CTO and CBO hold 11%, and the CHRO holds only 4%.  Women are more likely to hold CHRO positions, further contributing to the gender power gap. The webinar also found that on average, women executives hold just 10.7% of power in G20 companies, despite representing 15.9% of executive positions. Some countries, such as Australia (21.2%), South Africa (19.8%), and Canada (16.7%), fare better than others in terms of the gender power gap. Countries like Argentina (3.9%), South Korea (2.1%), and Saudi Arabia (1.8%) were found to have the lowest gender power gap figures.  Further research with The Female Lead revealed 292 companies in the S&P 500 placed less than 10% of the value of corporate stock in women's hands.  The full list of women shareholders included notable names such as: The UN Women report says global percentage of female MPs marginally increased to 26.5% from 25.5% in Only 13 countries have 50% or more cabinet level ministers, Nicaragua (62.5%), Chile (62.5%), Mozambique (55%), Andorra (50%), Colombia (50%); Germany, Netherlands, Norway (50% each), Belgium (57.1%), Liechtenstein (60%), Spain (63.6%), Finland (64.3%), leading with Albania (66.7%). There are 17 other countries having women's representation among Cabinet Ministers between 40 and 49.9%. Of these, nine states are in Europe, but nine countries — mainly from Oceania and West Asia — do not have any female representation among their cabinet members heading ministries.   At the global level, as of 1 January The power gap is also maintained by women being limited to certain portfolios. Women tend to lead policy areas related to gender equality, human rights, and social affairs, family and children affairs, social inclusion and development, social protection and social security, indigenous and minority affairs. The report says that the data indicates women tend to hold about 30% of the representation in public administration, education, and the environment, but men continue to dominate crucial policy areas like economics, defence, justice, and home affairs portfolios.   Female cabinet ministers constitute 12% in defence and local government portfolios, 11% in energy, natural resource fuels, and mining portfolios, and 8% in transport portfolio.   According to UN Women Alexandra Topping of The Guardian references a report on women's leadership within the multilateral system, which highlights the persistent gender power gap that has existed since the establishment of the United Nations.  Topping points out that out of 78 Presidents of the United Nations General Assembly, all but 4 were male. Furthermore, the UN has never selected a woman as Secretary-General since its inception in