Flyover is a feature on Apple Maps that allows users to view select areas in a 3D setting. Flyover also formerly allowed users to take "tours" of these locations through the City Tours feature, showcasing various landmarks in the area, however this feature was removed in Initially founded in Similarly to Google Earth, the implementation of Flyover has been prevented in certain areas primarily due to security concerns over the collection of data in sensitive locations, notably in Norway in In anticipation of the creation of a 3D mapping service that would eventually become Maps, Apple acquired Poly9, a Canadian 3D mapping company, in mid- Flyover was announced along with Apple Maps at the In Flyover was added to several cities and national parks in New Zealand, France, the United States, South Africa, Sweden and Japan, including Cape Town and two Arizona National Parks in Flyover was added to over 20 cities and locations in January In September Another major rollout of Flyover occurred in In January Apple collects the 3D data used for Flyover through the use of small military-grade  drone-like planes equipped with cameras, which fly up close to buildings to create a more detailed map. The cameras are positioned at designated angles to capture rooftops, edges and sides of buildings, trees, and other visible objects. Flyover imagery additionally collects topographical data which also appears on the software.  Once collected, 3D imagery can be generated within a period of hours.  As of With Flyover, certain locations – primarily big cities, landmarks and some national parks – can be viewed from a birds-eye perspective, as opposed to street level imagery provided by features such as Look Around on Apple Maps and Street View on Google Maps.  The images provided are three-dimensional, photo-realistic, and users can alter the vantage point on the map through panning or zooming in or out.   Flyover imagery has been viewed as similar to that of virtual reality, and it has theorized by some to be a possible precursor to a VR feature on Maps.   Flyover City Tours were first released in City Tours were removed from Maps as part of the release of iOS 26 in September City Tours were accessed via a button available in the search history of Maps. Flyover imagery could be viewed manually without starting the tour.  Most, but not all cities with Flyover allowed tours of a given city, where the above virtual tour of various landmarks in the area will be shown.   Flyovers are available in over 350  cities, metropolitan areas, national parks and landmarks across 31 countries and all six inhabited continents, as of Upon initial release in Similar to Maps itself, Flyover saw many visual issues upon release, a notable one containing a massive glitch on the Brooklyn and Anzac bridges in New York and Sydney and the Hoover Dam in Nevada, showing "plunges" on all structures.   Flyover was also criticized for its early imagery, as Apple was initially unable to properly capture smaller or lower objects or buildings, resulting in structures such as trees having a blocky or otherwise low-quality appearance.  Flyover additionally had glitches whilst interacting with other Maps features, including road markings, which would tend to follow the tops of 3D buildings rather than remain focused on the designated road, which particularly became an issue for bridges.  Google Earth, which also hosted 3D imagery on their mapping site, was noted to be experiencing similar issues with their image rendering.  As a result of these issues, Flyover was initially criticized for its low quality, as well as being parodied online.  Flyover was described by The Atlantic, an American magazine, as "painfully slow, sort of useless", in a In The decision was met with criticism from Fabian Stang, then mayor of Oslo, who called for the Norwegian government to allow Apple to add the feature, citing the possibility of increased tourism from the addition, also stating that Apple had already been permitted to conduct aerial surveys in "all Western capitals."    A spokesperson for the National Security Authority of Norway stated that obtaining the needed imagery from a "Norwegian supplier" or from the Norwegian Mapping Authority could potentially assist Apple in adding the feature, as said companies are required to produce their imagery in a lower resolution.   The US embassy in Norway also stated its support for Apple in adding the feature.  Outside of Apple, other companies including Nokia were permitted to survey Oslo for 3D imagery.  Flyover was eventually added to Oslo in late