In the iron and steel industry, direct reduction is a set of processes for obtaining iron from iron ore, by reducing iron oxides without melting the metal. The resulting product is pre-reduced iron ore. Historically, direct reduction was used to obtain a mix of iron and slag called a bloom in a bloomery. At the beginning of the 20th century, this process was abandoned in favor of the blast furnace, which produces iron in two stages (reduction-melting to produce cast iron, followed by refining in a converter). However, various processes were developed in the course of the 20th century and, since the Historically, the reduction of iron ore without smelting is the oldest process for obtaining steel. Low-temperature furnaces, unable to reach the melting temperatures of iron alloys, produce a bloom, a heterogeneous agglomerate of metallic iron more or less impregnated with carbon, gangue, and charcoal. This process was gradually succeeded, from the 1st century in China and the 13th century in Europe, by the blast furnace, which simultaneously reduces and melts iron.[3] Elaborate low furnaces, such as the tatara or the Catalan forge, survived until the early 19th century.[1] Compared with the indirect process (reduction-melting in the blast furnace, followed by cast-iron refining), these processes only survived when they enjoyed at least one of the following two advantages: More advanced direct reduction processes were developed at the beginning of the 20th century, when it became possible to smelt pre-reduced ores using the Martin-Siemens process or the electric arc furnace. Based on this technical and economic model, a number of processes were industrialized before World War II (the Krupp-Renn process adopted by the Shōwa Steel Works, the Chenot process,[1] etc.). They remained confidential, however, and their profitability was generally debated.[2] Modern direct reduction processes, based on the use of natural gas instead of coal, were studied intensively in the In Although profitable and innovative, the processes invented did not ultimately prove to be a technological revolution capable of supplanting the traditional blast furnace-based process.[3] However, the quantity of steel produced from pre-reduced materials grew steadily, outstripping world steel production: Packaging of pre-reduced iron ore is evenly divided between sponge iron and briquettes. Sponges are a highly porous metallic product, close to the original ore but highly pyrophoric, which limits their transport. They are therefore often subjected to hot compaction, which improves both product density and handling safety.[10] In Iron oxides are reduced in the following sequence:[11] Fe2O3 → Fe3O4 → FeO[nb 7] → Fe Each transition from one oxide to the next is due to two simultaneous high-temperature reduction reactions by carbon monoxide CO or dihydrogen H2: Fe3O4 + CO → 3 FeO + CO2 Fe3O4 + H2 → 3 FeO + H2O These temperatures differ from those predicted by the Ellingham diagram.[nb 8] In reality, there is a coupling between carbon monoxide reduction and dihydrogen,[nb 9] so that these reactions work together, with hydrogen significantly improving the efficiency of CO reduction. In coal-fired processes, part of the fuel is first burnt to heat the charge. The product of this combustion is CO2. When the temperature reaches 1,000 °C, the CO2[12] reacts with the unburned carbon to create CO:[13] CO2 + C ⇌ 2 CO when T > 1 000 °C (Boudouard reaction) The production of H2 cannot be achieved by the thermal decomposition of water, as the temperatures involved are too low. Hydrogen is in fact produced along with carbon monoxide by the reaction: H2O + C → H2 + CO when T > 1 000 °C These two reducing gas production reactions, which consume 172.45 and 131.4 kJ/mol[14] respectively, are highly endothermic and operate by limiting charge heating. The reducing atmosphere, rich in CO and H2, can be created from the high-temperature cracking of natural gas at around The system that generates the reducing gases is called a "reformer". In the Midrex process, it consists of tubes heated by the combustion of a portion (around a third) of the gas from the reactor. Plants for the production of pre-reduced iron ore are known as direct reduction plants. The principle involves exposing iron ore to the reducing action of a high-temperature gas (around Generally speaking, there are two main types[nb 10] of processes:[12] Another way of classifying processes is to distinguish between those where the reducing gases are produced in specific facilities separate from the reduction reactor - which characterizes most processes using natural gas - and those where the gases are produced inside the fusion reactor: coal-fired processes generally fall into this category.[13] However, many "gas-fired" processes can be fed by gasification units producing a reducing gas from coal.[15] In addition, since the melting stage is necessary to obtain alloys, reduction-melting processes have been developed which, like blast furnaces, produce a more or less carburized liquid metal. Finally, many more or less experimental processes have been developed.[13] Bold indicates technically and commercially proven processes (i.e. operating viably in several economic contexts)[16] HYL III (competing process with Midrex) SL/RN (developed in A number of other efficient but more confidential processes succeeded SL/RN: Kawasaki and Koho,[22] Krupp-CODIR[23] In these processes, iron ore is brought into contact with reducing gases produced and heated by a separate plant in a closed enclosure. As a result, these processes are naturally suited to the use of natural gas. In these processes, the ore is fed into a tank, where it remains until it is completely reduced. The vessel is then emptied of its pre-reduced ore, and filled with another charge of untreated ore. These processes can therefore be easily extrapolated from laboratory experiments. What's more, their principle, based on batch production, facilitates process control. In natural gas cyclic processes, a unit produces hot reducing gas, which is injected into the reactor. To ensure continuous operation of the unit converting natural gas into reducing gas, several tanks are operated in parallel and with a time lag. The best-known of this type is HYL I and its improved variant, HYL II. This is the oldest industrial direct gas reduction process, developed in Mexico in These are exclusively coal-fired processes, with the reducing gases generated inside the reduction vessel. The ore is charged with coal into a closed container. This is then heated until the oxygen present in the ore combines with the carbon before being discharged, mainly in the form of CO or CO2. This production of gas by heating a solid material means that the reactor belongs to the retort category. The principle is an ancient one: in northern China, the shortage of charcoal led to the development of processes using hard coal before the 4th century. To avoid any contact between iron and sulfur, the brittle element provided by coal, China developed a process that involved placing iron ore in batteries of elongated tubular crucibles and covering them with a mass of coal, which was then burned.[24] This process survived into the 20th century.[25] More recently, other historic processes have come to the fore, such as that of Adrien Chenot, operational in the Other retort processes were developed, such as KINGLOR-METOR, perfected in Based on the principle of counter-current piston flow, these processes are the closest to the blast furnace or, more accurately, the stückofen. Hot reducing gases are obtained from natural gas, in a separate unit from the shaft, and injected at the bottom of the shaft, while the ore is charged at the top. The pre-reduced materials are extracted hot, but in solid form, from the bottom of the shaft. This similarity to a blast furnace without its crucible made it one of the first processes explored by metallurgists, but the failures of the German Gurlt in Developed in the Its direct competitor, the HYL III process, is the result of a research effort by the Tenova Group (de), heir to the Mexican Hylsa pioneers. Accounting for almost 20% of pre-reduced product production, it differs from the Midrex process in that it features an in-house reforming unit for the production of reducing gases.[29] Other processes have been developed based on this continuous reactor principle. Some, like ULCORED,[30] are still at the study stage. Most have only been developed in a single country, or by a single company. Others were failures, such as the NSC process, of which a single plant was built in Coal-fired processes are variants of natural gas processes, where the gas can be synthesized from coal in an additional unit. Among these variants, the MxCol, of which one commercial unit in Angul commissioned by Jindal Steel and Power has been operational since Given that direct reduction is a chemical exchange between gas and solid, the fluidization of ore by reducing gases is an attractive line of research. However, the changing nature of the constituents, combined with the high temperature and the difficulty of controlling the fluidization phenomenon, make its adoption singularly difficult. Many processes have been developed on this principle. Some have been technical failures, such as the HIB (a single plant[38] commissioned in Developed in Rotation of the reduction furnace may be a design choice intended to circulate the ore through the furnace. It can also play an active part in the chemical reaction by ensuring mixing between the reactants present. Rotary hearth processes, where the ore rests on a fixed bed and travels through a tunnel, fall into the first category. Rotary kiln processes, where the ore is mixed with coal at high temperature, constitute the second category. These processes consist of an annular furnace in which iron ore mixed with coal is circulated. Hot reducing gases flow over, and sometimes through, the charge. The ore is deposited on a tray, or carts, rotating slowly in the furnace. After one rotation, the ore is reduced; it is then discharged and replaced by oxidized ore. A number of processes have been developed based on this principle. In the This non-exhaustive list shows that, despite the keen interest shown by steelmakers in developed countries during the These processes involve high-temperature blending of iron ore and coal powder, with a little limestone to reduce the acidity of the ore. Processes such as Carl Wilhelm Siemens',[48] based on the use of a short drum,[49] first appeared at the end of the 19th century. The tool used then evolved into a long tubular rotary kiln, inspired by those used in cement works, as in the Basset process, developed in the A process of historic importance is the Krupp-Renn. Developed in the The ACCAR process, developed in the late Other processes, built on the same principle, failed to develop, such as the Strategic-Udy,[20] consisting of a single plant commissioned in The SL/RN process, developed in liq. (cast iron) Udy Larco Krupp Renn As the smelting stage is necessary to obtain alloys and shape the product, direct reduction processes are frequently combined with downstream smelting facilities. Most pre-reduced iron ore is smelted in electric furnaces: in One idea is to carry out the entire reduction-melting process in the arc furnace installed downstream of the reduction plant. Several plasma processes operating above An alternative to the electric furnace is to melt the pre-reduction with a fuel. The cupola furnace is ideally suited to this task, but since one reason for the existence of direct reduction processes is the non-use of coke, other melting furnaces have emerged. The COREX process, in operation since Last but not least, a number of reduction-melting furnaces in the same reactor have been studied, but have not yet led to industrial development. For example, the ISARNA[30] process and its derivative HISARNA (a combination of the ISARNA and HISMELT processes[57]), is a cyclonic reactor that performs melting before reduction.[30] These processes have culminated in an industrial demonstrator tested in the Netherlands since In the US, where the Midrex process was first developed, direct reduction was seen in the Direct reduction is theoretically well-suited to the use of ores that are less compatible with blast furnaces (such as fine ores that clog furnaces), which are less expensive. It also requires less capital, making it a viable alternative to the two tried-and-tested methods of electric furnaces and blast furnaces.[20] (blast furnace gas) (COREX gas) The comparative table shows that the diversity of processes is also justified by the need for quality materials. The coking plant that feeds a battery of blast furnaces is just as expensive as the blast furnace and requires a specific quality of coal.[64][65] Conversely, many direct-reduction processes are disadvantaged by the costly transformation of ore into pellets: these cost on average 70% more than raw ore.[66] Finally, gas requirements can significantly increase investment costs: gas produced by a COREX is remarkably well-suited to feeding a Midrex unit,[55] but the attraction of the low investment then fades.[67] Although gas handling and processing are far more economical than converting coal into coke (not to mention the associated constraints, such as bulk handling, high sensitivity of coking plants to production fluctuations, environmental impact, etc.), replacing coke with natural gas only makes direct reduction attractive to steelmakers with cheap gas resources. This point is essential, as European steelmakers pointed out in "There's no secret: to be competitive, direct reduction requires natural gas at $2 per gigajoule, half the European price." - L'Usine nouvelle, September This explains the development of certain reduction-melting processes which, because of the high temperatures involved, have a surplus of reducing gas. Reduction-melting processes such as the COREX, capable of feeding an ancillary Midrex direct[54] reduction unit, or the Tecnored, are justified by their ability to produce CO-rich gas despite their higher investment cost.[64] In addition, coke oven gas is an essential co-product in the energy strategy of a steel complex: the absence of a coke oven must therefore be compensated for by higher natural gas consumption for downstream tools, notably hot rolling and annealing furnaces. The worldwide distribution of direct reduction plants is therefore directly correlated with the availability of natural gas and ore. In China, a country with gigantic needs and a deficit of scrap metal, and Europe, lacking competitive ore and fuels, have never invested massively in these processes, remaining faithful to the blast furnace route. The United States, meanwhile, has always had a few units, but since However, because direct reduction uses much more hydrogen as a reducing agent than blast furnaces (which is very clear for natural gas processes), it produces much less CO2, a greenhouse gas.[64] This advantage has motivated the development of ULCOS processes in developed countries, such as HISARNA, ULCORED, and others. The emergence of mature gas treatment technologies, such as pressure swing adsorption or amine gas treating, has also rekindled the interest of researchers.[30] In addition to reducing CO2 emissions, pure hydrogen processes such as Hybrit are being actively studied with a view to decarbonizing the steel industry.[69]