The double-nail illusion[1] is a multi-modal illusion in which two similar physical objects, which are located one behind the other in depth, appear visually to be next to each other (at a depth about halfway between the two physically present objects) instead of one being directly behind the other. This observation cannot be explained on the basis of classical theories of binocular depth perception (Krol The basic setup was mentioned in The conditions for the illusion and the main observations are described under Basic double-nail illusion, under Measurements of ghost images and under Variations. Related observations are listed under Edges and surfaces. Identical images. In the basic illusion, the two objects are upright in the visual field at the same height and with the same length and colour, and are behind each other, in line with the nose (Krol Area for fine stereopsis. In order to experience the illusion, both real objects must be within the range for fine stereopsis (in the figure: patent stereopsis) (Krol Distance. If the viewing distance to the two objects is increased, the depth range in mm increases. The distance between the two objects can then be greater. Conversely, if the viewing distance is reduced, the distance between the objects must be smaller. By varying the viewing distance, it is possible to switch between seeing the illusion and seeing the double images (Krol Nose support to fix the head.[clarification needed] Convergence. If an observer with normal vision focuses his attention on both objects, both eyes automatically cohere and accommodate at a point between the two objects. This is increasingly the case as the distance between the two objects becomes smaller. At the moment this happens, a stable state is created in which it is more difficult to converge at a different distance. This means that once the illusion is seen, it is easy to continue seeing it (Krol Nose rest. The illusion is very sensitive to disturbances, and can be evoked most quickly with a viewing arrangement that is precisely aligned and in which the position of the head is stabilized, for example with a nose rest (Krol The lower part of the figure contains a simplified representation of the neuromodel that initiated the investigation of the double-nail illusion (Krol In the double-nail illusion, four binocular cells A', B', C' and D' are stimulated, which signal the location and depth of A, B, C and D. If there were no interaction between the cells, the model predicts that four objects should be perceived. To explain the observation in the double-nail illusion, it is assumed that the binocular cells, when activated, influence each other as follows: The result is that C' and D' become extra activated and ghost images are seen, and A' and B' suppress each other's activity and become silent, with the result that the physically present objects A and B are not perceived. This mechanism could also explain the perceived depth in the random dot stereograms of Bela Julesz.[9] The above explanation applies to the situation where the two actual stimuli are within the range of stereopsis. If A and B are further apart and fall outside this area, then according to the model, A and B are not seen because there are no binocular cells that can signal the presence of an object. In other words, there cannot and need not be any interaction between binocular neurones to explain the perception, as in the Wheatstone stereogram below. The model described above is part of a model that, in addition to fine stereopsis, also includes single vision and double vision (Krol Krol ( Observers in the experiments had to fix a fixed point and indicate with a pointer where the observed left and right images were located. (Whether the observer fixed the point correctly was determined with a monocular vernier line in each eye.) Figure Depth measurements shows a typical measurement. The figure shows the actual depth positions of A, B, C and D relative to the fixation distance. The symbols show the perceived depth. At small inclinations (rotations) the perceived images are seen at the positions of the ghost images C, D. From Panum's limiting case the images are seen at the positions of the real images A, B. The latter can be explained by the fact that C, D are then outside the area for stereopsis. Conclusion: at small inclinations the binocular ghost images (C, D) are indeed seen. At inclinations greater than Panum's limiting case the real objects (A, B) are seen. The hypothesis that binocular ghost images are seen in the basic double-nail illusion leads to the prediction of different appearances when the fixation point and the distance, shape or orientation of the two "nails" are varied. These variations have been demonstrated (Krol According to Hering ( Each object of the double-nail illusion consists of a plane with a left and a right edge, where the left edge is a light-dark transition and the right edge a dark-light transition, or vice versa. Krol ( As a result of the equal-contrast rule, the mid-sagittal strip illusion occurs: if a narrow plane such as a razor blade is held in the mid-sagittal plane, then edges A and B have opposite contrast and edges C and D have equal contrast. The apparent plane CD is seen and the real plane AB is not; this is not a double-nail illusion (Krol, In the demonstration in figure "Ambiguous surfaces" the observer cannot distinguish between seeing a disk on a pin above a white background, and a white truncated cone with a black top-plane. In both cases a black floating disk and a white cone are seen alternately (Krol The double-nail illusion is an illusion in which the perceptions via the eyes and touch, conflict with each other and with physical reality (Krol Krol ( Whether the correct situation is present can be checked by closing the left and right eyes alternately, without moving the head or the needle, and noting whether each eye sees two needles that are right next to each other at the shortest possible distance. N.B. The perception created when using a mirror image resembles, but is not exactly the same as, the physical illusion, see multimodal illusion. Some researchers use a Wheatstone stereogram to evoke the double-nail illusion (Krol Krol ( In summary, two types of objects can be distinguished: In stereograms, there are only physical objects in the form of the stereogram itself. There are no cues in the perceived image that indicate which objects are there or not. All perceived images are of type 2. In the double-nail illusion, there are both type 1 and type 2 images. The observer can discover which images are real by tactile perception, but this information is not used in visual perception. The research on the two-nail illusion has been described in several places[2][11][12][13][14] and this research is summarized in Krol ( The perception of the basic double-nail illusion can be described by Hering's cyclopean projection if the images are seen at the viewing distance (horopter); the observation of the variants cannot be explained in this way (Krol Burt and Julesz ( Measurements of the depth position of the observed images for the different variants, confirm that the observed images are binocular ghost images.[12] Ono published an alternative explanation in Krol and van de Grind ( Nakazimo and Kondo(