Jean Ziegler, Special Rapporteur of the UN Commission on Human Rights on the right to food stated in a report in the growing power of transnational corporations and their extension of power through privatization, deregulation and the rolling back of the State also mean that it is now time to develop binding legal norms that hold corporations to human rights standards and circumscribe potential abuses of their position of power.[116] — Jean Ziegler In August With the exception of non-derogable human rights (international conventions class the right to life, the right to be free from slavery, the right to be free from torture and the right to be free from retroactive application of penal laws as non-derogable),[120] the UN recognizes that human rights can be limited or even pushed aside during times of national emergency, although it clarifies: the emergency must be actual, affect the whole population and the threat must be to the very existence of the nation. The declaration of emergency must also be a last resort and a temporary measure. — United Nations, The Resource[120] Rights that cannot be derogated for reasons of national security in any circumstances are known as peremptory norms or jus cogens. Such International law obligations are binding on all states and cannot be modified by treaty. Critics[who?] of the view that human rights are universal argue that human rights are a Western concept that "emanate from a European, Judeo-Christian, and/or Enlightenment heritage (typically labeled Western) and cannot be enjoyed by other cultures that don't emulate the conditions and values of 'Western' societies."[121] Right-wing critics[who?] of human rights argue that they are "unrealistic and unenforceable norms and inappropriate intrusions on state sovereignty", while left-wing critics[who?] of human rights argue that they fail "to achieve – or prevents better approaches to achieving – progressive goals".[122] Simone Weil argues for a focus on human obligations over individual human rights. Weil advocated for rebuilding a Free France around a framework of obligations and needs and cautioning against a system built of rights.[123] Weil felt that in our moral culture centered on individual rights, it's as though we constantly turn away from others' suffering because we lack the moral strength to confront its most extreme expressions.[124] Weil maintained that all humans share universal obligations, though expressed differently in varying contexts, and that “duty to the human being as such, that alone is eternal.”[125]: 105, 129 Weil saw rights and obligations as interdependent: obligations belong to the self; rights exist only when others recognize their duties toward us. A person alone in the universe would have no rights, but still obligations. She emphasized that while rights are conditional, obligations are absolute and universal.[125]: 105, 129