Krasner also drew on the work by Arthur and connected the idea of path dependence to the study of political institutions. Douglass North, an economist and Nobel laureate, applied the idea of path dependence to institutions, which he defined as "the rules of the game in a society," and drew attention to the persistence of institutions. A synthesis Political scientists Ruth Berins Collier and David Collier, in Shaping the Political Arena ( These key concepts have been defined as follows:  Following a period of consolidation of critical junctures framework, few new developments occurred in the Critical junctures and incremental change An important new issue in the study of change is the relative role of critical junctures and incremental change. On the one hand, the two kinds of change are sometimes starkly counterposed. Kathleen Thelen emphasizes more gradual, cumulative patterns of institutional evolution and holds that "the conceptual apparatus of path dependence may not always offer a realistic image of development."  On the other hand, path dependence, as conceptualized by Paul David is not deterministic and leaves room for policy shifts and institutional innovation. Critical junctures and contingency Einar Berntzen notes another debate: "Some scholars emphasize the historical contingency of the choices made by political actors during the critical juncture."  For example, Michael Bernhard writes that critical junctures "are periods in which the constraints of structure have weakened and political actors have enhanced autonomy to restructure, overturn, and replace critical systems or sub-systems."  However, Berntzen holds that "other scholars have criticized the focus on agency and contingency as key causal factors of institutional path selection during critical junctures" and "argue that a focus on antecedent conditions of critical junctures is analytically more useful."  For example, Dan Slater and Erica Simmons place a heavy emphasis on antecedent conditions. Schenoni provides a synthesis by suggesting that critical junctures (longer windows such as wars) where antecedents play a causal role, contain critical events (shorter episodes such as battles) where contingency is more clear. Legacies and path dependence The use of the concept of path dependence in the study of critical junctures has been a source of some debate.