Schenoni provides a synthesis by suggesting that critical junctures (longer windows such as wars) where antecedents play a causal role, contain critical events (shorter episodes such as battles) where contingency is more clear. Legacies and path dependence The use of the concept of path dependence in the study of critical junctures has been a source of some debate. On the one hand, James Mahoney argues that "path dependence characterizes specifically those historical sequences in which contingent events set into motion institutional patterns or event chains that have deterministic properties" and that there are two types of path dependence: "self-reinforcing sequences" and "reactive sequences."  On the other hand, Kathleen Thelen and other criticize the idea of path dependence determinism,  and Jörg Sydow, Georg Schreyögg, and Jochen Koch question the idea of reactive sequences as a kind of path dependence. Institutional and behavioral path dependence The study of critical junctures has commonly been seen as involving a change in institutions. However, many works extend the scope of research of critical junctures by focusing on changes in culture. Avidit Acharya, Matthew Blackwell, and Maya Sen state that the persistence of a legacy can be "reinforced both by formal institutions, such as Jim Crow laws (a process known as institutional path dependence), and also by informal institutions, such as family socialization and community norms (a process we call behavioral path dependence)."  A critical juncture approach has been used in the study of many fields of research: state formation, political regimes, regime change and democracy, party system, public policy, government performance, and economic development. In addition, many processes and events have been identified as critical junctures. Pre- Michael Mann, in The Sources of Social Power ( Modern era critical junctures Some of the processes in the modern era that are commonly seen as critical junctures in the social sciences are: Considerable discussion has focused on the possibility that the COVID-19 pandemic will be a critical juncture.