=== Positive illusions === Idealization (perceiving the beloved in the most positive way, or overlooking their faults) is a form of positive illusions. A 1996 study of couples who had been dating for 19 months and couples who had been married for 6.5 years found that "Individuals were happier in their relationships when they idealized their partners and their partners idealized them." A brain scan experiment also found that couples who were still in love after four years (as compared to those who weren't) showed activation in a region associated with suspending negative judgment and over-evaluating a partner. While Elaine Hatfield and others have traditionally associated idealization with passionate love, studies on positive illusions have looked at couples in varied stages of their relationships, including long-term couples. == Companionate love == Companionate love is said to be felt less intensely than passionate love, consisting more of gentle affection which is felt when things are going well. Elaine Hatfield writes that companionate love is "a steady burning fire, fueled by delightful experiences but extinguished by painful ones" Companionate love is more about long-term relationships, and Hatfield emphasizes partner compatibility as being important. Ellen Berscheid comments that companionate love "may be the 'staff of life' for many relationships and a better basis for a satisfying marriage than romantic love." Companionate love is linked to intimacy and Hatfield suggests that intimate relationships have these characteristics: Companionate love is usually considered the same as storge, although James Graham has argued on the basis of a meta-analytic factor analysis that the storge love attitude most corresponds to practical friendship which lacks qualities of companionate love (such as intimacy and commitment). === Attachment === Langeslag et al.'s Attachment Scale (analogous to companionate love) has items asking about: Feeling that one can count on the beloved. Being prepared to share one's possessions with the beloved.