Intelligence literature, sometimes referred to as espionage nonfiction, is a genre of non-fiction or historical literature, written in any language, that focuses on the intelligence field, and its most popular subfield known as espionage.[1][2] This field of literature includes biographies and autobiographies of intelligence officers, historical research and analysis of intelligence operations and missions, studies of undercover work, policy and legal studies surrounding the fields of intelligence law, intelligence history, and national security law, academic and professional journals, essays, textbooks, and more.[3][4] Other works of intelligence literature include official histories, official reports, tradecraft and technical manuals, declassified documents and archival materials, and oral histories and interviews.[5][6][7] "The literature of intelligence is rich and voluminous... The topic of intelligence has long captured the imagination of readers, in part because it has been sensationalized and made to sound more intriguing than it probably is in real life... Authors breathlessly await the declassification of government documents decades after a particularly nasty chapter of American history or, if they cannot wait, seek to obtain documents expeditiously through the Freedom of Information Act process." — William C. Spracher, Teaching Intelligence in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Canada, https://doi.org/10. "Readers may be surprised to discover how much intelligence activity went on in the ancient world. Indeed, finding spies in the ancient authors is not nearly as difficult as tracking down some of the secondary literature. Articles and books on aspects of ancient intelligence activities have appeared all over the globe in more languages than one author could ever hope to read." — Rose Mary Sheldon, Introduction, Espionage in the Ancient World Intelligence literature is rooted in the original works of myth, folklore, oral tradition, political science and philosophy, as spycraft has always been a tool of statecraft, warfare, and diplomacy, and for the majority of its history, intelligence literature was wrapped-up into these genres. In ancient cultures, there often was no distinction between fiction and nonfiction.