Android Central is a technology journalism website based in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom that covers the Android operating system. It publishes news, reviews of products and services, and editorials. Android Central also covers Google, Android TV and streaming, Wear OS, Chrome OS, Gemini, and Android XR and VR devices in the MetaQuest range. According to its archive, the site publishes between 280 and 450 articles a month, on average,[4] and it received 4.7 million visitors in January 2025, according to SimilarWeb.[5]

Smartphone Experts – later called Mobile Nations – launched Android Central in September 2008 under the guidance of Dieter Bohn, later a founding editor of The Verge. 

The first article published on the site was on 25 September, 2008, by Casey Chan, titled "T-Mobile G1 doesn't have a 3.5mm headphone jack."[6]

The site has published numerous exclusives and scoops since its founding, including a first look at the 2013 Nexus 7 tablet and the almost-never-released HTC Merge. 

In 2019, Android Central’s parent company, Mobile Nations, was acquired by Future plc[7] for $60 million.[8]

In 2024, the site published a series of exclusives on Meta’s Project Orion.[9]

Canadian journalist Shruti Shekar took over as editor-in-chief of Android Central in September 2023, succeeding Jeramy Johnson. Shekar frequently appears on the Canadian network CBC as a guest expert on technology news.[10]

Derrek Lee is the managing editor of Android Central; he has been with the site since November 2020. Jerry Hildenbrand is responsible for the "Android and Chill column." Dieter Bohn was managing editor of the site from its launch in 2008 through 2011 when he left to help launch The Verge. Casey Chan was a co-founder of Android Central who later joined Gizmodo.

Each January, Android Central issues its Best Of awards, wrapping up the most noteworthy products, services, and technologies of the previous year.[11] The awards recognize the best Android phones, wearables, smart glasses and games, Chromebooks and tablets, apps and software, and audio accessories.  


