Genital surgery on young children, excessive medical exams and nonconsentual genital photography have been described as medicalized rape. According to the NNID Foundation, an intersex organization in the Netherlands, "These actions [of medicalized rape and sexual violence] include: grooming behaviour, provoking sexual arousal without consent sometimes even on small children, construction of vagina's [sic] on children and teens that require insertion of penis-shaped objects [vaginal dilation], repeated observing and examining genitals far beyond any level needed to provide care, but rather out of personal interest, and producing photographs and video's [sic] of intersex genitals without consent and spreading these images without restrictions."  These experiences negatively impact the well-being of intersex people. Vaginal dilation and surgeries early in life cause physical and psychological trauma. Nonconsensual surgeries can contribute to healthcare avoidance and medical distrust among intersex people, causing them to delay receiving preventative or emergency care. Some intersex people also have information about their diagnosis withheld from them, potentially leading to them learning about their condition in an unsupportive setting rather than from an (ideally) sensitive disclosure from a doctor. Corrective genital surgeries continue to be performed due to persisting beliefs by some doctors that young children will heal better, will not remember the procedure, and surgical correction could prevent the child from feeling psychological distress about their anatomy; these beliefs are lacking in supporting evidence. Another belief is that parents should be allowed to consent to genital surgery if the child is too young, but this is heavily disputed. When parents make descisions about surgery, they are often uninformed on intersex conditions, and conversations with clinicians often focus on "normalization." These interactions can overshadow child autonomy and informing the parents why corrective surgeries are controversial.