That "personal magnetism is a delicate consideration for others, a kind of cultivated sympathy to the feelings, likes and dislikes of those with which we come in contact, a subjugating of the self in every direction that would be distasteful to the feelings of another." But ultimately it is created by suggestion, stating "Thoughts take form in action. The converse of this is true also, for our actions take form in the thoughts of others...Think the right thoughts and desirable actions will follow."[74]: 270–273 Regarding Magnetic Healing and distant treatments, Parkyn demonstrated that these methods were essentially forms of Suggestive Therapeutics. He cited the common practice among such healers of instructing patients to "lie down several times a day, relax all over, and rivet their attention upon any part of the body which is in trouble, claiming that by so doing the circulation flows freely to that part and heals it." To this, Parkyn responded, "What is this but a very sensible and potent suggestion?"[74]: 278 He also included a letter from a former student who had become a Magnetic Healer. In it, the student acknowledged that his healing technique was fundamentally Suggestive Therapeutics, but noted that framing it as magnetic force made the curative idea more persuasive to patients, thereby enhancing the suggestion's effect on the involuntary mind.[74]: 277 Dr. Parkyn endorsed this dynamic and explored it more directly in The Magnetic Healing Cup, marketed as "The last and greatest discovery of the nineteenth century."[79] Parkyn developed several original and effective methods for inducing the suggestive state that were taught at The Chicago School of Psychology and in his Mail Course book. One involved striking a match and having the subject stare at the flame until it nearly burned out, repeating this three times. On the third match, the subject was told their eyes would become stuck shut after closing them and in most cases they could not reopen them, soon entering a deep suggestive state. Another method required the subject to hold both hands in front of their face and slowly count each fingernail from one little finger to the other, inducing drowsiness or sleep by the tenth finger.