Technical Integrity Engineering, also known as Asset Integrity, involves various engineering disciplines that focus on ensuring a product, process, or system meets its intended requirements when used. Applying these disciplines to reduce costs, maintain schedules, manage technical risks, and handle legal concerns during a project's entire life cycle ensures operational safety and efficiency in e.g., Oil and Gas, Power Generation, and Nuclear Power industries.

Integrity Engineering is a profession that uses science, math, economics, social insights, legal knowledge, and practical skills to ensure that products and systems are not only safe but also meet their legal and business requirements. Integrity Engineers perform tasks such as organizing inspections, managing integrity programs, and making sure plant facilities, including structures, pipelines, equipment, and piping systems, remain in good condition.

For Integrity Management, it's crucial that Integrity Engineers make independent, impartial decisions to ensure equipment is designed, maintained, operated, and decommissioned following the best industry practices. This independence helps maintain a high level of integrity and safety.

Integrity Engineers may be required to manage, develop, or conduct the following:[1]

Integrity Engineering encompasses the concept of:

This may be applied to management, machines, devices, systems, materials, and processes that safely realize improvements to the lives of assets.

The Integrity Engineer (IE) may also be involved with other asset life-cycle issues, such as the basis of design (Process design basis) through to recycling. The Front End Engineering Design stage (FEED) aids in the selection of vessels, piping, pipelines, and other equipment. At this FEED stage, the optimum material requirements, mitigation, and maintenance requirements for the intended period of operation become the basis for detailed engineering. It is the role of the IE to develop/validate the integrity management plan and implement the monitoring and management procedure for the intended period of operation. It may also be the responsibility of the integrity engineer to incorporate and manage any variation identified (metal loss, material degradation, cracking mechanisms, mitigation issues, i.e. Cathodic protection potentials, coating failures, etc.) during the monitoring regime.

It may be a generalist in nature and/or applied with specific prior knowledge denoted using a pre-nominal of Mechanical, Inspection, Asset, Well or Wellhead, Technical, Pipeline, Signal, Fabrication, or Commissioning depending upon the equipment or system under scrutiny.

Integrity Engineers construct and implement Integrity Management plans that detail the requirements of the item or asset under scrutiny and study any adverse effects from internal or external sources that damage / impair that item or system. These are used to build suitable inspection and condition monitoring forward strategies. The monitoring may include physical (pipes/vessels) and nonphysical systems (Management legal obligations). This diversity will depend upon the requirements of the task at hand.

Integrity Engineers also oversee or carry out Integrity Engineering Audit(s) to ensure legal compliance with company, national and international standards and ensure quality assurance within the process that meets good engineering standards.
