King Kong Balls (popularly known as Monkey Balls) is a giant Czech statue created by Denis Defrancesco originally placed in Prague but later moved to Beroun, depicting a blue monkey with a large golden scrotum. The statue was created after Defrancesco saw an image of a real monkey lounging with large testicles. Defrancesco created the sculpture in 2019 which measures at 5.04 meters long, 2.10 meters wide, and 2.25 meters high, and weighing 2780 kg.[1]

When asked about the sculpture, Defrancesco said:

"King Kong’s Balls, the Gaze of a King, the Royal Pause for the gallery... Between Conceit and indifference, a certain idea of freedom cast in bronze... Sculpt and let the sculpture speak for itself"

"Those who will see nothing but its attributes will have seen nothing, understood nothing... A grand show to bug the ‘right-minded’... to deceive fools... A half-smile"

"The coarse illusion of an impudent Monkey... The taunt of Kong to set the art-fair “cheetahs’” tongues wagging, for all the masturbatory bonobos to cop complexes.... His balls out in the open like coconuts thrown in the faces of conformism."

"The calm resistance of an untamed Monkey... His gaze is elsewhere... Far from the human menagerie, from this narrow-minded world... Far from this brash theatre, this crass comedy"

"The Kong has a dream... A paradise lost... With no cage and no master... Freedom at the foot of My Tree ... A laugh that we cannot hear... His balls like gongs to summon the Great Awakening"[2]

After the success of King Kong Balls, Defrancesco would create various smaller versions that were able to be purchased by anyone who had the money.[3] On September 4, 2021, YouTuber Jschlatt would post a video expressing his interest in the sculptures and create merchandise around the monkey.[4] With the money raised, Jschlatt would buy out all but one of the smaller sculptures available and post constant videos about them with the latest being posted on December 13, 2021. While on a podcast with fellow YouTubers Ted Nivison and Swaggersouls, it would be revealed that Swaggersouls had purchased the remaining sculpture that Jschlatt was intending to buy.[5] Swaggersouls also claims that Defrancesco made him a personal NFT because of the purchase.
