Portal topics - (Random portal) Engineering is the practice of using natural science, mathematics, and the engineering design process to solve problems within technology, increase efficiency and productivity, and improve systems. The traditional disciplines of engineering are civil, mechanical, electrical, and chemical. The academic discipline of engineering encompasses a broad range of more specialized subfields, and each can have a more specific emphasis for applications of mathematics and science. In turn, modern engineering practice spans multiple fields of engineering, which include designing and improving infrastructure, machinery, vehicles, electronics, materials, and energy systems. For related terms, see glossary of engineering. As a human endeavor, engineering has existed since ancient times, starting with the six classic simple machines. Examples of large-scale engineering projects from antiquity include impressive structures like the pyramids, elegant temples such as the Parthenon, and water conveyances like hulled watercraft, canals, and the Roman aqueduct. Early machines were powered by humans and animals, then later by wind. Machines of war were invented for siegecraft. In Europe, the scientific and industrial revolutions advanced engineering into a scientific profession and resulted in continuing technological improvements. The steam engine provided much greater power than animals, leading to mechanical propulsion for ships and railways. Further scientific advances resulted in the application of engineering to electrical, chemical, and aerospace requirements, plus the use of new materials for greater efficiencies. The word engineering is derived from the Latin ingenium. Engineers typically follow a code of ethics that favors honesty and integrity, while being dedicated to public safety and welfare. Engineering tasks involve finding optimal solutions based on constraints, with testing and simulations being used prior to production. When a deployed product fails, forensic engineering is used to determine what went wrong in order to find a fix. Much of this product lifecycle management is now assisted with computer software, from design to testing and manufacturing. At larger scales, this process normally funded by a company, multiple investors, or the government, so a knowledge of economics and business practices is needed. (Full article...) An engineer is a practitioner of engineering. The word engineer (Latin ingeniator, the origin of the Ir. in the title of engineer in countries like Belgium, The Netherlands, and Indonesia) is derived from the Latin words ingeniare ("to contrive, devise") and ingenium ("cleverness"). The foundational qualifications of a licensed professional engineer typically include a four-year bachelor's degree in an engineering discipline, or in some jurisdictions, a master's degree in an engineering discipline plus four to six years of peer-reviewed professional practice (culminating in a project report or thesis) and passage of engineering board examinations. (Full article...) Although less common, there are also solid state welding processes such as friction welding or shielded active gas welding in which metal does not melt. (Full article...) In Major branches of Engineering: Aerospace | Agricultural | Automation engineering | Biomedical | Chemical | Civil | Computer | Electrical | Electronic | Energy engineering | Engineering physics | Engineering Management | Environmental | Industrial | Information | Mining & Mineral Processing | Manufacturing | Mechanical | Mechatronics | Petroleum | Software | Structural | More Featured articles on Engineering WikiProject Chemical and Bio Engineering | WikiProject Civil Engineering | WikiProject Computer Science | WikiProject Computing | WikiProject Electronics | WikiProject Energy | WikiProject Metalworking | WikiProject Transport | More Technology WikiProjects | More Science WikiProjects | WikiProject Engineering Rules | Match log | Results page (for watching) | Last updated: Note: The list display can now be customized by each user. See List display personalization for details. The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Purge server cache