Computer science plays a very important role in modern sports. It is used to analyze players’ performance, fitness, and health with the help of computers and software. Coaches use data and video analysis to plan better strategies and improve team performance. Technologies like sensors, cameras, and wearable devices help in training and injury prevention. Computers are also used for fair decision-making through systems like VAR and digital scoreboards. Online platforms and live streaming allow people to watch sports from anywhere in the world. Overall, computer science has made sports more advanced, accurate, and efficient. Computer science in sport is an interdisciplinary discipline that has its goal in combining the theoretical as well as practical aspects and methods of the areas of informatics and sport science. The main emphasis of the interdisciplinarity is placed on the application and use of computer-based, but also mathematical techniques in sport science, aiming in this way at the support and advancement of theory and practice in sports.[1] The reason computer science has become an important partner for sport science is mainly connected with "the fact that the use of data and media, the design of models, the analysis of systems etc. increasingly requires the support of suitable tools and concepts which are developed and available in computer science".[2] Going back in history, computers in sports were used for the first time in the Based on the progress of computer science and the invention of more powerful computer hardware in the In the early stages of this area statistics on biomechanical data, like different kinds of forces or rates, played a major role. Scientists started to analyze sports games by collecting and looking at such values and features in order to interpret them. Later on, with the continuous improvement of computer hardware — in particular microprocessor speed – many new scientific and computing paradigms were introduced, which were also integrated in computer science in sport. Specific examples are modeling as well as simulation, but also pattern recognition, and design.[5] As another result of this development, the term 'computer science in sport' has been added in the encyclopedia of sports science in The importance and strong influence of computer science as an interdisciplinary partner for sport and sport science is mainly proven by the research activities in computer science in sport. The following IT concepts are thereby of particular interest:[6] Based on the fields from above, the main areas of research in computer science in sport include amongst others: A clear demonstration for the evolution and propagation towards computer science in sport is also the fact that nowadays people do research in this area all over the world. Since the As a first example, in Australia and New Zealand scientists have built up the MathSport group of ANZIAM (Australia and New Zealand Industrial and Applied Mathematics), which since The European community was also amongst the leading motors of the emergence of the field. Some workshops on this topic were successfully organized in Germany since the late Since then, such international symposia took place every two years all over Europe. As the first conferences were a raving success, it was decided to go even further and the foundation of an organization was the logical consequence. This step was accomplished in The 12th International Symposium of Computer Science in Sports was held in Moscow (Russia) from 8 to 10 July In addition to the international associations from above, currently the following national associations on computer science in sport exist (if available, the web addresses are also given):