Sociological Images is a blog that offers image-based sociological commentary and is one of the most widely read social science blogs.[1] Updated daily, it covers a wide range of social phenomena. The aim of the blog is to encourage readers to develop a "sociological imagination" and to learn to see how social institutions, interactions, and ideas affect the individual. Started in Sociological images was founded in Hosted by The Society Pages, which is a hub for social science blogs and websites, Sociological Images is a blog that is updated daily and often between two and four times a day. The posts are written by Gwen Sharp, Lisa Wade and guest contributors. Each post usually features an image, such as a graph, advertisement, commercial, video clip, product, or screenshot, as well as commentary about the image; most of these images are taken from mainstream websites, other social science sites, or reader submissions. Around 50% of the blog posts focus on analyzing these visual elements of culture. The blog covers a wide variety of sociological topics, such as gender inequality, data mapping, homelessness, lesbian politics, and the environment. The most common topics are gender, sexuality, class, nationalism, race, ethnicity, marketing, and body image; in particular, the site focuses on how American popular culture perpetuates gender inequities.[2][5][6] Many of the posts are based on items sent in by readers which Wade and Sharp then analyze; they receive an average of 15 to 20 items per day.[1] According to Wade and Sharp, "involvement of the readership in this way has undoubtedly been key to the site's success; not only does it ensure a steady stream of content, but it creates a personal connection to the site and engages readers more actively in applying the sociological perspective as they look for relevant examples to submit".[1] The site also collects popular posts under its "trending" tab, recommends posts under "editor's favorites", and references to posts in the media under "In the News". As of May The tagline of the blog—"Inspiring sociological imaginations everywhere"—is taken from C. Wright Mills, a famous sociologist. As Wade explains, sociology for her is designed "to explain social patterns outside the individual" by looking at how culture and institutions affect individuals. Sharp points out that for readers of the blog, sociology can explain why they and their friends enjoy the same brands or how advertising perpetuates gender stereotypes.[7] The blog allows for commenting and from these comments discussions emerge, which one reviewer has called "intelligent, respectful, and constructive".[5] Wade and Sharp themselves have reflected on the different expectations readers have for the commenting space on their blog: "While we understand the arguments for creating safe spaces for the constructive discussion of race, gender, sexual orientation, and other issues, particularly for those groups who may face prejudice or discrimination, ensuring a truly safe space has proven impossible". Noting that the blog receives 500 to 750 comments on average per week, they had to make some decisions about how to handle the traffic. As of May In her review of Sociological Images, Karen McCormack identifies four different types of posts throughout the blog: visual plus, text plus, open post, and data display. In the visual plus posts, the images dominate and little text is needed to explain the point of the post. For example, she highlights a post from 14 January Some of the posts explain specific scholarly theories for the general reader. For example, in Hand Sapolio Soap Will Make You “Welcome Among the Best People”,[13] Sharp uses vintage soap advertisements to explain Joan Jacobs Brumberg's theories about how culture constructs a connection between girls' hygiene and feelings of personal worth.[1] In general, the site builds on the scholarly work of advertising scholars Jean Kilbourne and Sut Jhally.[14] As Wade and Sharp point out, they try to "pull back the curtain" on marketing and advertising in their blog. For example, they discuss how advertising has co-opted the language of "choice" from feminism and pro-choice campaigns in order to sell cosmetics.[7] On 19 March On 12 March Sociological Images is designed to be used as a teaching tool as well as a blog. It is aimed at both lower- and upper-division undergraduates and is a "useful resource to connect classroom work with popular culture and media imagery"[2] as well as "extremely useful for instructors who wish to keep pace with the abundant ways that popular culture reifies discrimination".[5] Its content applies to courses in sociology, social science methods, media studies, gender studies, and courses focused on race, ethnicity and class.[2][5] Wade and Sharp include sample assignments that allow instructors to integrate the blog into class work. For example, students can write a post and submit it to the blog. They can also select an advertisement that revolves around "sex, race, gender, family roles, nationality or class" and then find additional advertisements on their own, writing an analysis of the implicit messages in the set.[2] In her review of the blog, Karen McCormack describes how well the posts lend themselves to generating class discussion. She cites the post "The Double Standard in Sexualizing Teen Celebrities"[20] as one way to spark discussion; "while students may disagree about differences in male and female vulnerability and sexuality, a class exploring gender could be enhanced by referring to the images as a way of focusing discussion on the larger issue of how different groups are represented differently and unequally".[2] McCormack also points out that the high-quality comments on the blog "provide a strong model for students learning to read and analyse critically".[2] The site also includes course guides that organize posts from the blog around frequently taught sociology concepts.[1] Wade and Sharp have also created a complementary Pinterest board that organizes the images from Sociological Images into 23 topic areas, such as race, heteronormativity, sexy toy makeovers, and gendered parenting and housework.[1][21] Sociological Images receives about 500,000 visitors each month. As of Readers of Sociological Images tend to be between 18 and 34 years old, female and college educated, with incomes of less than $60,000. Forty-nine percent of readers are in the United States, 10% from Western Europe, 10% from Canada, 5% from India, and 2% from Australia.[1] Readers are drawn to the site in a variety of ways, some as part of their daily reading habits and some through internet searching, such as through the phrase "Disney princess". Social networking sites also account for a significant amount of the site's traffic. Over 700,000 visits in Sociological Images was reviewed by Karen McCormack in Visual Studies. She praised the blog's ability to explain sociology to those outside academia, writing that "the most exciting thing about Sociological images is that it can truly bring sociology to everyone", but she did point out some "drawbacks" to the blog form itself, such as the lack of space to discuss the original context for some of the images.[2] It was also reviewed by David T. Mayeda in Teaching Sociology, who praised it as "an insightful, thought-provoking site that can be used by sociology instructors and students".[5] He particularly highlights the ways in which the authors "show how discriminatory imagery evolves over time, preserving dominant narratives in society, but manifesting in different ways depending on the social context".[5] He emphasizes that the audience of the site is not other academics, pointing out that the site "tends not to provide deeper theoretical rhetoric in its entries".[5] In their review of the site, MERLOT (Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and Online Teaching), wrote that the site "strongly encourages us to develop our sociological imaginations by presenting brief discussions of timely and compelling imagery, spanning the breadth of sociological inquiry".[23] Male privilege and entitlement posts on the site tend to receive the greatest volume of negative reactions. Readers will sometimes argue that gender equity already exists and that Wade and Sharp are reading "too much into" the images. In particular, posts that deconstruct sexual power dynamics and sexual violence are some that receive the most resistance. People are scared to realize, Wade says, that "their body has internalized" these gender expectations.[7] Moreover, while the site's posts on gender inequity are often "routinely praised" by many readers, they are also linked to by men's rights groups, attracting criticism.[1] But it is posts about fat and health related to weight that bring out the most hurtful speech in the comments. Sharp mentions in an interview that she has to take significantly more time out to monitor the site after she posts on these topics to delete and respond to fat-shaming.[3]