Nuclear engineering is the engineering discipline concerned with designing and applying systems that utilize the energy released by nuclear processes.   The most prominent application of nuclear engineering is the generation of electricity. Worldwide, some 439 nuclear reactors in 31 countries generate 10 percent of the world's energy through nuclear fission.  In the future, it is expected that nuclear fusion will add another nuclear means of generating energy.  Both reactions make use of the nuclear binding energy released when atomic nucleons are either separated (fission) or brought together (fusion). The energy available is given by the binding energy curve, and the amount generated is much greater than that generated through chemical reactions. Fission of 1 gram of uranium yields as much energy as burning 3 tons of coal or 600 gallons of fuel oil,  without adding carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.  Nuclear engineering was born in The first nuclear reactor to generate electricity was Experimental Breeder Reactor I (EBR-I), which did so near Arco, Idaho, in The first commercial nuclear power plant, built to be connected to an electrical grid, is the Obninsk Nuclear Power Plant, which began operation in For a chronology, from the discovery of uranium to the current era, see Outline History of Nuclear Energy or History of Nuclear Power. Also see History of Nuclear Engineering Part 1: Radioactivity, Part 2: Building the Bomb, and Part 3: Atoms for Peace. See List of Commercial Nuclear Reactors for a comprehensive listing of nuclear power reactors and IAEA Power Reactor Information System (PRIS) for worldwide and country-level statistics on nuclear power generation. Nuclear engineers work in such areas as the following:    Many chemical, electrical and mechanical and other types of engineers also work in the nuclear industry, as do many scientists and support staff. In the U.S., nearly 100,000 people directly work in the nuclear industry. Including secondary sector jobs, the number of people supported by the U.S. nuclear industry is 475,000.  In the United States, nuclear engineers are employed as follows:  Job prospects for nuclear engineers worldwide are not available, but the IAEA estimates that nuclear energy capacity will grow by 40% (an additional 514 GW(e) ) to 2.5 times current capacity (an additional 950 GW(e)) by Nuclear Engineering Seibersdorf GmbH (NES) for pre-disposal management including treatment, conditioning and interim storage of low- and intermediate level radioactive waste (LILW)."  Nuclear Engineering Seibersdorf GmbH (NES) collects, processes, conditions, and stores radioactive waste and does decontamination and decommissioning of nuclear facilities for the Republic of Austria.  Nuclear Power in Canada. Organizations that provide study and training in nuclear engineering include the following: North China Electric Power University and North China Electric Power University. Tsinghua University and Tsinghua University. National Polytechnic University of Armenia Republic of Armenia Baku State University, Republic of Azerbaijan Belarusian State University of Informatics and Radioelectronics, Republic of Belarus Belarusian National Technical University, Republic of Belarus Belarusian State University, Republic of Belarus L.N. Gumilev Eurasian National University, Republic of Kazakhstan Sarsen Amanzholov East Kazakhstan State University, Republic of Kazakhstan D. Serikbayev East Kazakhstan Technical University (EKTU), Republic of Kazakhstan AGH University of Science and Technology (Akademia Górniczo-Hutnicza im. Stanisława Staszica w Krakowie), Republic of Poland National Research Nuclear University «MEPhI», Russian Federation Nizhny Novgorod State Technical University n.a. R.E. Alekseev, Russian Federation The National Research Tomsk Polytechnic University, Russian Federation Odessa National Polytechnic University (OPNU), Ukraine Samarkand State University, Republic of Uzbekistan The IAEA also provides guidance for nuclear engineering curricula: https://www-pub.iaea.org/mtcd/publications/pdf/pub https://www.nuclear.sci.waseda.ac.jp/index_en.html https://tpu.ru/en/about/department_links_and_administration/department/view/?id= http://nukbilimler.ankara.edu.tr/en/nuclear-research-and-technologies-department/ http://www.nuce.boun.edu.tr/ University of Birmingham University of Bristol University of Cambridge University of Central Lancashire University of Cumbria Defence Academy of the United Kingdom University of Dundee Imperial College London Lancaster University University of Leeds University of Liverpool The University of Manchester Nottingham Trent University Nuclear Technology Education Consortium (NTEC) The Open University University of Sheffield University of Surrey University of the West of Scotland Air Force Institute of Technology Abilene Christian University Clemson University Colorado School of Mines Georgia Institute of Technology Idaho State University Kansas State University Louisiana State University Massachusetts Institute of Technology Missouri University of Science and Technology North Carolina State University Ohio State University Oregon State University Penn State University Purdue University Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute South Carolina State University Texas A&M University United States Military Academy at West Point University of California, Berkeley University of Florida University of Idaho University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign University of Maryland University of Massachusetts Lowell University of Michigan University of Missouri University of Nevada, Las Vegas University of New Mexico University of Pittsburgh University of Rhode Island University of South Carolina University of Tennessee University of Texas University of Utah University of Wisconsin-Madison Virginia Commonwealth University Virginia Tech