The New Family Structures Study (abbreviated NFSS) is a sociological study of family structures conducted by sociologist Mark Regnerus of the University of Texas at Austin. The study surveyed over 15,000 Americans of ages 18 to 39.  The first research article based on data from the study was published in July The article concluded that people who had had a parent who had been in a same-gender relationship were at a greater risk of several adverse outcomes, including "being on public assistance, being unemployed, and having poorer educational attainment".  The study was met with considerable criticism from many academics,    scholarly organizations,   and medical journals. : A The Witherspoon Institute, a conservative think-tank, contributed $695,000 in funding and the Bradley Foundation contributed $90,000. The Witherspoon Institute's president expected results that would be unfavorable to those supporting gay marriage.  In the initial report, Regnerus stated that the Witherspoon Institute and the Bradley Foundation played no role in the design of the study, and dismissed accusations that these organizations had improperly influenced him. In The NFSS survey of over 15,000 Americans between the ages of 18 and 39  was conducted by Knowledge Networks on behalf of the University of Texas at Austin.  Its stated purpose was to determine differences in outcomes among young adults raised in different family structures.  The survey collected data from young adults and sorted them into the following categories, where "R" is the young adult questioned: : 757–758 The study compared various types of families, and found that subjects who perceived their mothers as having engaged in a same-sex relationship were more likely to have been sexually abused as children. When compared with those who grew up in (still) intact, biological mother–father families, the subjects who reported that their mother had had a same-sex relationship and did not make a similar report about their father look different on outcomes regarding including education, depression, employment status, and marijuana use.  Regnerus states although the findings reported may be explicable in part by a variety of forces uniquely problematic for child development in lesbian and gay families—including a lack of social support for parents, stress exposure resulting from persistent stigma, and modest or absent legal security for their parental and romantic relationship statuses—the empirical claim that no notable differences exist must go.  The term LM is used for subjects who stated that their mother had had a same-sex romantic relationship  but did not make a similar statement about their father.  The term GF is used for subjects that stated that their father had had a same-sex romantic relationship.  The term IBF is used for subjects whose biological families were intact from birth through the time of the survey.  (The following results are mean scores on select dichotomous outcome variables.) The results are read in the percentage of children from each family structure who responded positively to each question. For example, for the variable "currently married" 43% of respondents from intact bio-family answered yes, whereas 36% of those in the LM category answered yes, and 35% of those in the GF category answered yes. Cynthia Osborne, who is on the UT-Austin faculty along with Regnerus, argued the study was unable to show "whether same-sex parenting causes the observed differences". She also said that "Children of lesbian mothers might have lived in many different family structures, and it is impossible to isolate the effects of living with a lesbian mother from experiencing divorce, remarriage or living with a single parent." Similarly, Gary Gates of the Williams Institute argued that the study's comparison of children of lesbian mothers was a less fair comparison than, for instance, comparing "children of heterosexual or same-sex couples who were raised in similar homes".  Regnerus's former mentor Christian Smith  has described the public and academic reaction to the New Family Structures Study as a "witch hunt"  and said that the "push-back" to Regnerus's article "is coming simply because some people don't like where the data led".  This backlash, Smith argues in his book The Sacred Project of American Sociology, is a result of the content of sociology's "sacred project" (of mitigating oppression, inequality, etc.); Smith holds that the critical reaction, e.g. on methodological issues, displays a set of double standards insofar as work by other scholars could be (but is generally not) subjected to similar criticism.  Regnerus's study was defended by 18 social scientists in a letter written on the website of the Institute for Studies of Religion at Baylor University.  Soon after the paper was published, gay blogger Scott Rose accused Regnerus of scientific misconduct for two reasons: deviating from ethical standards and possible falsification of his research. An inquiry later conducted by the University of Texas-Austin found that no investigation into these charges was warranted.  In In July In the November In August Two subsequent studies published in Social Science Research  and Sociological Science  claimed that when methodological flaws were removed from data used in Regnerus study, the conclusions were opposite. The first peer-reviewed and published criticism is the Cheng and Powell, The second such peer reviewed criticism is by Stanford University Sociology professor Michael J. Rosenfeld which also brings out the methodological flaws in Regnerus study. It was published in Sociological Science.  The New Family Structures Study was cited in amicus briefs for the United States Supreme Court cases of United States v. Windsor and Hollingsworth v. Perry.  It was also cited by U.S. District Court judge Alan Cooke Kay in Jackson v. Abercrombie,  who used Regnerus's study to dismiss other studies that had come to different conclusions.  In the