Aphantasia (/ˌeɪfænˈteɪʒə/ i AY-fan-TAY-zhə, /ˌæfænˈteɪʒə/ AF-an-TAY-zhə) is the inability to voluntarily visualize mental images.  The phenomenon was first described by Francis Galton in Aphantasia can be considered the opposite of hyperphantasia, the condition of having extremely vivid mental imagery.   The phenomenon was first described by Francis Galton in To my astonishment, I found that the great majority of the men of science to whom I first applied, protested that mental imagery was unknown to them, and they looked on me as fanciful and fantastic in supposing that the words "mental imagery" really expressed what I believed everybody supposed them to mean. They had no more notion of its true nature than a colour-blind man who has not discerned his defect has of the nature of colour.  In The first discovery of this by Ribot was the case of a man whom he mentions as a well-known physiologist. For that man, even the words "dog, animal" (while he was living among dogs and experimenting on them daily) were not accompanied by any image, but were seen by him as being printed. Similarly, when he heard the name of an intimate friend, he saw it printed and had to make an effort to see the image of this friend... Moreover, according to Ribot, men belonging to the typographic-visual type cannot conceive how other people's thought can proceed differently.  The phenomenon remained largely unstudied until The idea of aphantasia was popularised on social media in Zeman's In In A In In In In In addition to congenital aphantasia, there have been cases reported of acquired aphantasia—characterized by new onset of diminished voluntary visual imagery—due either to brain injury or psychological causes.   In A A There have been various approaches to find a general theory of aphantasia or incorporate it into current philosophical, psychological and linguistic research. Blomkvist  has suggested that aphantasia is best explained as a malfunction of processes in the episodic system and sees it as an episodic system condition. Nanay  has argued that at least some instances of this condition can be explained in terms of unconscious mental imagery.[clarification needed] Alternative explanations for aphantasia have also been proposed in the scientific literature. Lorenzatti  provides a summary of these views. Aphantasia also has been studied from philosophical perspectives. Šekrst  proposed that a gradual range of perceptions and mental images, from aphantasia to hyperphantasia, influences philosophical analysis of mental imagery from a fuzzy standpoint, along with influence on linguistics and semiotics. Whiteley  argues that a modified theory of dreaming has to incorporate aphantasia, by involving the claim that dreams are a non-voluntary form of imagination. Additionally, research by Boran  into romantic desire has shown a potential link between vividness of mental imagery and romantic feelings, suggesting that mental imagery may also play a role in emotional memory and relationships. In Some people with aphantasia have acquired visual mental imagery after using psychedelics like ayahuasca or psilocybin. 