A peripheral device, or simply peripheral, is an auxiliary hardware device that a computer uses to transfer information externally.[1] A peripheral is a hardware component that is accessible to and controlled by a computer but is not a core component of the computer. It can communicate with a computer through wired or wireless connections.[2] Many modern electronic devices, such as Internet-enabled digital watches, video game consoles, smartphones, and tablet computers, have interfaces for use as a peripheral. Mouses and keyboards became the standard for computer peripheral input devices in the A peripheral can be categorized based on the direction in which information flows relative to the computer, and is usually categorised one of three ways: Input, output and storage.[3] Broadly speaking, an input device converts incoming data into binary code, expressed through electrical signals, which is comprehensible to a computer. This includes not just user-inputted information such as instructions, but also potentially information about the environment, such as temperature or pressure. Input devices in turn can be categorized based on: Examples include a mouse, keyboard, scanner, game controller, microphone and webcam. An output device reverses the process of an input device, turning binary code for machines into comprehensible input for a user. A display device is the most common form of output device which presents output visually on computer screen. The output appears temporarily on the screen and can easily be altered or erased. With all-in-one PCs, notebook computers, hand held PCs and other devices; the term display screen is used for the display device. The display devices are also used in home entertainment systems, mobile systems, cameras and video game systems. Display devices form images by illuminating a desired configuration of Raster display devices are organized in the form of a 2-dimensional matrix with rows and columns. This is done many times within a second, typically 60, 75, 120 or 144 Hz on consumer devices. Other examples include a monitor, printer, headphones, and speakers. Many external storage devices double as input/output devices, as in addition to storing information, they also need facilities for loading information on and off the memory (input), and showing the user what is being stored (output). Examples include: storage device (such as disk drive, solid-state drive, USB flash drive, memory card and tape drive), modem, router, gateway and network adapter One of the earliest known computer peripherals to be made was the punched card, which was first introduced into computing in the late Punched tape was later used instead of punched cards as a computer peripheral, because of its lower cost, and higher storage capacity.[7] Programs were written to punched tape using existing teleprinters,[8] then were transferred to a reader so that a computer could load the program.[9] The first documented computer to use punched tape as storage was the Zuse Z1, released in In the early In In the early Personal computers began to be widespread from the IBM began using semiconductor memory in