Critical juncture theory focuses on critical junctures, i.e., large, rapid, discontinuous changes,  and the long-term causal effect or historical legacy of these changes.  Critical junctures are turning points that alter the course of evolution of some entity (e.g., a species, a society). Critical juncture theory seeks to explain both (1) the historical origin and maintenance of social order, and (2) the occurrence of social change through sudden, big leaps.  Critical juncture theory is not a general theory of social order and change.  It emphasizes one kind of cause (involving a big, discontinuous change) and kind of effect (a persistent effect).  Yet, it challenges some common assumptions in many approaches and theories in the social sciences. The idea that some changes are discontinuous sets it up as an alternative to (1) "continuist" or "synechist" theories that assume that change is always gradual or that natura non facit saltus – Latin for "nature does not make jumps."  The idea that such discontinuous changes have a long-term impact stands in counterposition to (2) "presentist" explanations that only consider the possible causal effect of temporally proximate factors.  Theorizing about critical junctures began in the social sciences in the The idea of episodes of discontinuous change, followed by periods of relative stability, was introduced in various fields of knowledge in the Philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn's landmark work The Structure of Scientific Revolutions ( Kuhn challenged the conventional view in the philosophy of science at the time that knowledge growth could be understood entirely as a process of gradual, cumulative growth.  Stephen Jay Gould writes that "Thomas Kuhn’s theory of scientific revolutions" was "the most overt and influential" scholarly work to make a "general critique of gradualism" in the twentieth century.  Anthropologist Ernest Gellner proposed a neo-episodic model of change in Sociologist Michael Mann adapted Gellner's idea of "'episodes' of major structural transformation" and called such episodes "power jumps."  Sociologist Seymour Lipset and political scientist Stein Rokkan introduced the idea of critical junctures and their long-term impact in the social sciences in Gellner had introduced a similar idea in the social sciences. However, Lipset and Rokkan offered a more elaborate model and an extensive application of their model to Europe (see below). Although Gellner influenced some sociologists,  the impact of Lipset and Rokkan on the social sciences was greater. Kuhn's ideas influenced paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould, who introduced the idea of punctuated equilibrium in the field of evolutionary biology in Gould's model of punctuated equilibrium drew attention to episodic bursts of evolutionary change followed by periods of morphological stability. He challenged the conventional model of gradual, continuous change - called phyletic gradualism.  Since its launching in In studies of society, some scholars use the term "punctuated equilibrium" model,  and others the term "neo-episodic" model.  Studies of knowledge continue to use the term "paradigm shift".  However, these terms can be treated as synonyms for critical juncture. Key ideas in critical junctures research were initially introduced in the Critical junctures and legacies Seymour Lipset and Stein Rokkan ( In more general terms, Lipset and Rokkan's model has three components:  Rokkan ( The reproduction of legacies through self-replicating causal loops Arthur Stinchcombe ( Stinchcombe elaborated the idea of historical causes (such as critical junctures) as a distinct kind of cause that generates a "self-replicating causal loop." Stinchcombe explained that the distinctive feature of such a loop is that "an effect created by causes at some previous period becomes a cause of that same effect in succeeding periods."  This loop was represented graphically by Stinchcombe as follows: Stinchcombe argued that the cause (X) that explains the initial adoption of some social feature (Y) was not the same one that explains the persistence of this feature. Persistence is explained by the repeated effect of Y on D and of D on Y. Additional contributions were made in the Punctuated equilibrium, path dependence, and institutions Paul A. David and W. Brian Arthur, two economists, introduced and elaborated the concept of path dependence, the idea that past events and decisions affect present options and that some outcomes can persist due to the operation of a self-reinforcing feedback loop.  This idea of a self-reinforcing feedback loop resembles that of a self-replicating causal loop introduced earlier by Stinchcombe. However, it resonated with economists and led to a growing recognition in economics that "history matters."  The work by Stephen Krasner in political science incorporated the idea of punctuated equilibrium into the social sciences. Krasner also drew on the work by Arthur and connected the idea of path dependence to the study of political institutions.  Douglass North, an economist and Nobel laureate, applied the idea of path dependence to institutions, which he defined as "the rules of the game in a society," and drew attention to the persistence of institutions.  A synthesis Political scientists Ruth Berins Collier and David Collier, in Shaping the Political Arena ( These key concepts have been defined as follows:  Following a period of consolidation of critical junctures framework, few new developments occurred in the Critical junctures and incremental change An important new issue in the study of change is the relative role of critical junctures and incremental change. On the one hand, the two kinds of change are sometimes starkly counterposed. Kathleen Thelen emphasizes more gradual, cumulative patterns of institutional evolution and holds that "the conceptual apparatus of path dependence may not always offer a realistic image of development."  On the other hand, path dependence, as conceptualized by Paul David is not deterministic and leaves room for policy shifts and institutional innovation.  Critical junctures and contingency Einar Berntzen notes another debate: "Some scholars emphasize the historical contingency of the choices made by political actors during the critical juncture."  For example, Michael Bernhard writes that critical junctures "are periods in which the constraints of structure have weakened and political actors have enhanced autonomy to restructure, overturn, and replace critical systems or sub-systems."  However, Berntzen holds that "other scholars have criticized the focus on agency and contingency as key causal factors of institutional path selection during critical junctures" and "argue that a focus on antecedent conditions of critical junctures is analytically more useful."  For example, Dan Slater and Erica Simmons place a heavy emphasis on antecedent conditions.  Schenoni provides a synthesis by suggesting that critical junctures (longer windows such as wars) where antecedents play a causal role, contain critical events (shorter episodes such as battles) where contingency is more clear.  Legacies and path dependence The use of the concept of path dependence in the study of critical junctures has been a source of some debate. On the one hand, James Mahoney argues that "path dependence characterizes specifically those historical sequences in which contingent events set into motion institutional patterns or event chains that have deterministic properties" and that there are two types of path dependence: "self-reinforcing sequences" and "reactive sequences."  On the other hand, Kathleen Thelen and other criticize the idea of path dependence determinism,  and Jörg Sydow, Georg Schreyögg, and Jochen Koch question the idea of reactive sequences as a kind of path dependence.  Institutional and behavioral path dependence The study of critical junctures has commonly been seen as involving a change in institutions.  However, many works extend the scope of research of critical junctures by focusing on changes in culture.  Avidit Acharya, Matthew Blackwell, and Maya Sen state that the persistence of a legacy can be "reinforced both by formal institutions, such as Jim Crow laws (a process known as institutional path dependence), and also by informal institutions, such as family socialization and community norms (a process we call behavioral path dependence)."  A critical juncture approach has been used in the study of many fields of research: state formation, political regimes, regime change and democracy, party system, public policy, government performance, and economic development.  In addition, many processes and events have been identified as critical junctures. Pre- Michael Mann, in The Sources of Social Power ( Modern era critical junctures Some of the processes in the modern era that are commonly seen as critical junctures in the social sciences are: Considerable discussion has focused on the possibility that the COVID-19 pandemic will be a critical juncture.  Barrington Moore Jr.'s Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World ( Collier and Collier's Shaping the Political Arena: Critical Junctures, the Labor Movement, and the Regime Dynamics in Latin America ( John Ikenberry's After Victory: Institutions, Strategic Restraint, and the Rebuilding of Order After Major Wars ( Seymour Martin Lipset, in The Democratic Century ( Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson’s Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty ( Critical juncture research typically contrasts an argument about the historical origins of some outcome to an explanation based in temporally proximate factors.  However, researchers have engaged in debates about what historical event should be considered a critical juncture. The rise of the West A key debate in research on critical junctures concerns the turning point that led to the rise of the West. Historical sources of economic development (with a focus on Latin America) Another key debate concerns the historical roots of economic development, a debate that has address Latin America in particular. Historical origins of the Asian developmental state Research on Asia includes a debate about the historical roots of developmental states. Research on critical junctures is generally seen as an important contribution to the social sciences. Within political science, Berntzen argues that research on critical junctures "has played an important role in comparative historical and other macro-comparative scholarship."  Some of the most notable works in the field of comparative politics since the Barrington Moore Jr.'s Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World ( Ruth Berins Collier and David Collier's Shaping the Political Arena: Critical Junctures, the Labor Movement, and the Regime Dynamics in Latin America ( Robert D. Putnam's Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy ( Johannes Gerschewski describes John Ikenberry After Victory ( Frank Baumgartner and Bryan D. Jones's Agendas and Instability in American Politics ( Within economics, the historically informed work of Douglass North,  and Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson,  is seen as partly responsible for the disciple's renewed interest in political institutions and the historical origins of institutions and hence for the revival of the tradition of institutional economics. 