World federalism or global federalism, is a political ideology that advocates for a democratic, federal world government. The world federation would hold authority on issues of global concern, while member states would retain authority over local and national issues. Overall sovereignty over the world population would largely reside with the federal government.  World federalism is distinguished from unitary world government models by the principle of subsidiarity, in which decisions are made as much as possible at the most immediate level possible, preserving national agency to a large extent. Proponents maintain that a world federation offers a more effective and accountable global governance structure than the existing United Nations organization, while simultaneously allowing wide autonomy for continental, national, regional and local governments. Unlike the more widely used concept of world government, world federalism describes a specific form of global governance, i.e., that of a federal, democratic world republic. The difference between world federalism and other types of global governance are outlined below. The United Nations is not a legislative body and is thus limited to a mostly advisory role.  Its stated purpose is to foster cooperation between existing national governments rather than exert authority over them.   Furthermore, membership of the United Nations organization is reserved for states,  not individuals (see World Citizenship). A unitary world government would consist of a single, central government body with supreme sovereignty. While administrative subdivisions might exist, their powers are delegated by the central government. In a world federation based on subsidiarity, the delegation is the other way round, from local to central. Global federal government is subsidiary to local in that it only does what local government cannot.  Plans that sought to unify the known world by conquest have historically aimed at a centralized, unitary government, rather than a federal government. World federalists generally do not support violent paths towards a world federation (see World Federalism § Proposals for establishing a world federation) A confederation is a union of sovereign nations, which are pursuing a common cause. Member states in a confederation are sometimes free to secede from the confederation. In a federation based on subsidiarity, nations choose to give up their sovereignty over global issues they cannot manage to a central authority empowered to manage these issues at the global level. Sovereignty over national issues remains with the nation. Different forms of federalism can be applied at the global level. Traditional federalism is the model adopted by the United States, in which the States relinquish their sovereignty to the federal government, which in turn represents them in front of other nations. It constitutes a centralized model of world federalism. The most decentralized model of world federalism is the confederation of States, or world confederalism, which gives the States a higher degree of power and freedom in which countries preserve their sovereignty, relinquishing to the federal authority only the powers to manage and regulate intergovernmental relationships. The European Union can be considered an example of such system of government, because its Member States preserve their sovereignty even though they relinquish part of it to the community's authorities in specific matters.  World federalism has evolved from more general proposals for a world government. Proposals for a world government can be traced to antiquity when first aspirations of world rule appeared. Such aspirations are recorded in the Ancient Near East and later Greece, Rome and India. At least two similar concepts appeared independently, one in ancient China and later Japan, and another in the Inca Empire. These ideas were unhindered by the existence of other independent states, including competing empires, and the existence of unknown world of unknown size. Alexander the Great pursued the goal of conquering the entire known world and subjugating it under his rule. Though characteristic element of premodern empires, the aspiration of world rule invariably expressed universal monarchy of divine kings and dynasties. Rome is the only state to establish universal empire under government other than monarchy. The Roman Republic attained supremacy over the Mediterranean by 189 BC. However, Rome continued to define client states as nominally independent for decades longer, and by 27 BC the Republic turned into universal monarchy without making a proposal for universal republic. The Romans talked about imperium sine fine but not "res publica sine fine". Nevertheless, the Romans had an idea similar to world citizens.  The Edict of Caracalla in 212 AD granted the Roman citizenship to all inhabitants of the Roman Empire. The contemporary Han Dynasty performed a similar process with a longer-lasting result. They granted the status of Han Chinese to all inhabitants of their Empire and eventually formed a single ethnic group, the largest in the world today. In Europe, the Roman concept of universal monarchy long outlived the Roman Empire, though after Dante Alighieri  the general attitude towards universal monarchy changes from positive and nostalgic to negative. Predictions of universal monarchy or universal caesarism were made by such late thinkers as Johann Gottlieb Fichte,   Fyodor Dostoyevski  and Oswald Spengler.  In the generation of Dostoyevsky and Spengler appeared theories of future global empire under undefined form of government. Among the earliest proposals of world government other than monarchy and world state other than empire were the "universal republic" of Anacharsis Cloots  ( The Campaign for World Government was founded in Advocacy tactics involved congressional testimony, lobbying of legislators, national letter-writing campaigns, and participation in world government conferences. The campaign succeeded in motivating the resolution at the The rise of nationalism and the growing threat of fascism in Europe caused a resurgence of the idea of a unified world under democratic principles. With the release of the book Union Now, Clarence Streit proposed a political union of democratic nations. The United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Ireland, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Denmark, Norway, Sweden and Finland were to form the seed for a democratic world republic. A world congress, made up of a House of Representative and a Senate should decide on matters related to defence, trade and currency.  During World War II, multiple other world federalist organizations were founded, especially in the United States. Inspired by Clarence Streit's Union Now, Harris Wofford Jr. founded the Student Federalists in The In Also in We world federalists are convinced that the establishment of a world federal government is the crucial problem of our time. Until it is solved, all other issues, whether national or international, will remain unsettled. It is not between free enterprise and planned economy, nor between capitalism and communism that the choice lies, but between federalism and power politics. Federalism alone can assure the survival of man. The United World Federalists emerged as the main advocacy group for world federalism in the United States after WWII. The United World Federalists was a non-partisan, non-profit organization with members in forty-eight states, founded in Asheville, North Carolina on February 23, In During the 81st United States Congress ( In After his release, Davis and several supporters founded "Operation Oran", entering a session of the United Nations General Assembly, where he gave a short speech before being escorted out of the hall: "I interrupt you in the name of the people of the world not represented here. Though my words may be unheeded, our common need for world law and order can no longer be disregarded. We, the people, want the peace which only a world government can give. The sovereign states you represent divide us and lead us to the abyss of total war. I call upon you no longer to deceive us by this illusion of political authority. I call upon you to convene forthwith a World Constitutional Assembly to raise the standard around which all men can gather, the standard of true peace, of One Government for One World."[citation needed] Prominent people, such as Albert Camus,  André Breton, Albert Schweitzer, and Albert Einstein, publicly supported Garry Davis, fueling the sudden public interest in the idea. The first meeting of the World Citizens' Movement in Paris a month after his speech gathered 25,000 people. Garry Davis founded the World Service Authority, promoting the idea of world citizenship. Over 750,000 people from over 150 countries registered as world citizens between The movement for world federalism has declined from its peak in the Major active world federalist organizations include World Constitution and Parliament Association (WCPA), Citizens for Global Solutions and Democracy Without Borders. The World Federalist Movement/Institute for Global Policy acts as the umbrella organization for world federalist advocacy, albeit its focus has shifted away from its original core issue towards projects like Responsibility to Protect and the Coalition for the International Criminal Court.  There are a number of proposals for the establishment of a world federation: Reform of the UN and existing international institutions: Regional Unification: Other: Numerous books and articles have been written on the practical implementation of world federalist goals. A comprehensive analysis and a roadmap to world federalism is presented in the book World Federalist Manifesto, Guide to Political Globalization, in which the author presents a model of world federalism divided into international legislative, executive, judicial and financial branches and the world government shares the authority with Member States, in a way that both are sovereign within their respective sphere of competence.  Albert Einstein grew increasingly convinced that the world was veering off course. He arrived at the conclusion that the gravity of the situation demanded more profound actions and the establishment of a "world government" was the only logical solution.   In his "Open Letter to the General Assembly of the United Nations" of October There is no salvation for civilization, or even the human race, other than the creation of a world government.- Albert Einstein, Letter to World Federalists, Stockholm Congress, Einstein and other prominent figures sponsored the Peoples' World Convention (PWC), which took place in The Constitution for the Federation of Earth, drafted by international legal experts in Debate around world government falls into four broad categories, which is often applied also to world federalism:  The establishment of a world federation would require extraordinary amounts of coordination and trust from all nations of the world, which are in economic and political competition with each other. Critics argue that world federalism is thus an unreachable utopia. Proponents of world federalism point to existential crises, such as climate change, war and pandemics, which make global coordination necessary and inevitable. An argument revolving around political realism asserts that, while conventional approaches (diplomacy, deterrence, disarmament, international organizations, etc.) have not avoided the most undesirable outcomes, world federalism instead is a realistic extension of the proven concepts of rule of law and liberal democracy to the global level.  Critics argue that a concentration of power on a global level would raise the risks and probability of tyranny, deterioration of human rights, and cultural homogenization. Proponents of world federalism point out that democratic and republican principles are at the core of world federalism, which are commonly seen as safeguards against tyranny and oppression in nation states. Realizing the inherent risks of the concentration of power, world federalists advocate a vertical separation of powers between different levels of government (subsidiarity), horizontal separation of powers between different government branches (checks and balances), democratic participation, and constitutionally enshrined human and civil rights.  Critics argue that the problems world federalism proposes to solve (e.g. climate change, war, pandemics, hunger) are too big to be solved by political means only, i.e. even if a world federation existed, it would not be capable of alleviating these issues. World federalists argue that these issues originate from the insistence on national sovereignty and the lack of democratic structures at the global level. Effective global governance could therefore deal directly with the root cause of these problems. Critics argue that it is unnecessary to establish a world federation to solve global problems. They point to existing structures of global governance, such as international organizations and the United Nations.  World federalists maintain that current structures of global governance are not capable of enforcing decisions, and that they are not democratically representing the world's population. A world federation has been mentioned in several works of fiction, along with more general concepts of world government. India