#NoFilter is a hashtag used by users on social media platforms to indicate that no social media filter has been used on the shared images; it is mostly commonly used on Instagram.    By using this hashtag, users can make a point that they are sharing real images and not deceiving others.  In today's world, there is a lot of pressure on people to look perfect, especially women, so they are very likely to edit their images using different kinds of filters available on social media to look better.  Not only common people but also celebrities are impacted by this pressure.  However, there are people who use filter but still use this hashtag. According to research by Spredfast in When Instagram was launched in #NoFilter started as a positive thing, inspiring people to be who they are. It aimed to motivate people to show their real selves and not be ashamed of themselves. However, people started misusing the hashtag. They still used the hashtag on images that were tweaked and deceive others.  Many celebrities and influencers were called out for misusing the hashtag. American reality TV star and businesswoman, Kylie Jenner was heavily criticized for using filters on her images while promoting her cosmetic brand; she was selling cosmetics but using filters on her images, which others found hypocritical.  People want to be seen as perfect by using filter but do not want to reveal that they use filters, so they try to trick others. As a result, #NoFilter has become a gimmick and has lost its credibility. Initially, #NoFilter was seen as a tool of empowerment; users, especially young women who no longer want to use filters to look better, use it to fight the pressure of always look perfect for others.  However, now it is used as a trick. Many people do not believe the posts that use this hashtag; research shows that this hashtag is nothing but a lie because of being heavily misused.  It is no longer as impactful as it used to be in the This Internet-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by adding missing information.