A snakebot, also referred to as a snake robot, is a biomorphic robot that resembles a snake.  Snakebots have uses similar to those of certain types of soft robots.  Snakebots can vary significantly in size and design. Their small cross-section-to-length ratios allow them to maneuver through tight spaces. Their ability to change shape allows them to traverse varied terrain.  Snake robots are often designed by connecting multiple independent segments, which provides redundancy and enables continued operation even if some parts are damaged. Snakebots have been posited for a range of practical applications.   A snakebot differs from a snake-arm robot in that, snakebots are usually self-contained, whereas snake-arm robots typically have mechanics remote from the arm itself, possibly connected to a larger system.[citation needed] By mimicking the locomotion of snakes, snakebots can be used for tasks in multiple industries that traditional robots or human workers may find challenging or impossible to accomplish safely.  Snakebots have been considered for the following applications: Traditional Snakebots move by changing the shape of their body, similar to actual snakes. Many variants have been created that use wheels or treads for movement. There has yet to be any Snakebots that accurately approximate the locomotion of real snakes. However, researchers have produced new movement methods that do not occur in nature.[citation needed] In snakebot research, a gait is a periodic mode of locomotion/movement. Sidewinding and lateral undulation are both examples of gaits. Snakebot gaits are often designed by investigating period changes to the shape of the robot. For example, a caterpillar moves by changing the shape of its body to match a sinusoidal wave. Similarly, a snakebot can move by adapting its shape to different periodic functions.  Sidewinder rattlesnakes can ascend sandy slopes by increasing the portion of their bodies in contact with the sand to match the reduced yielding force of the inclined sand, allowing them to ascend the maximum possible sand slope without slip.  Snakebots that side-wind can replicate this ascent.  Snakebots are currently being researched as a new type of robotic, interplanetary probe by engineers at the NASA Ames Research Center. Software for snakebots is also being developed by NASA, so that they can learn by experiencing the skills to scale obstacles and remembering the techniques.  Snake robots are also being developed for search and rescue purposes at Carnegie Mellon University's Biorobotics Lab. 