The Motograph News Bulletin, also known as the Zipper, was a 380-feet-long electromechanical news ticker display that wrapped around One Times Square.  Frank C. Reilly and Francis EJ Wilde, both engineers at Motogram, developed the technology used in the display.  While similar illuminated displays existed at the time, they all had disadvantages. Wilde patented many devices which helped overcome these shortcomings.  In It took 8 weeks to install the display with work being done 24 hours a day in order to meet the contracted deadline. The Times wanted to pay a maximum of $50,000 but due to the fact it was unique and custom manufactured along with several difficulties unforeseen during the installation process, Motogram ended up paying $80,000 for it. This led to increased animosity between the two companies. The first headline displayed was the announcement of Herbert Hoover's victory over Al Smith on November 6, The New York Times wrote and published an article, titled HUGE TIMES SIGN WILL FLASH NEWS, describing the device.  The Motograph quickly became an icon of New York City. It appeared in many films of the time. On May 18, On the morning of August 14, The Motograph operated continuously until In The Motograph was eventually replaced by a new display in In The display wrapped around the 3rd floor of the building. It was made up of 14,800 incandescent bulbs distributed in a rectangular frame 368 feet (112 meters) long and 5 feet (1.5 meters) tall.  Each of the letters displayed consisted of a matrix 12 bulbs vertically and 7 bulbs horizontally. All of these bulbs were connected by vast amount of wiring to the device which allowed the letters to be displayed.  In order to compose a headline, an operator would place thin metal plates 19 by 7.6 cm (7.5 by 3.0 in) with the letters making up the headlines in relief onto a frame. The frame would move along a conveyor belt to a field of brushes each connected to individual lightbulbs. This would cause the lightbulbs to flash in a manner making up the individual letters, thus displaying the headline.