The Museum of Engines and Mechanisms is an italian academic museum located in Palermo, Italy, and is part of the Museum System of the University of Palermo.   Inaugurated on February 25, The museum is dedicated to the research, restoration, and dissemination of its heritage, in accordance with the recommendations of ICOM (International Council of Museums). It organizes exhibitions, seminars, workshops, and educational activities and collaborates with other museums, institutions, and associations within the cultural initiatives promoted by the University of Palermo.    On May 31, The museum houses a varied collection of engines and industrial, scientific, and educational equipment, acquired and used in various fields of research and teaching since the second half of the 19th century, following the foundation of the Royal School of Applied Engineering and Architecture of the University of Palermo in The collection illustrates the evolution of fluid machines and related studies, covering a range of practical applications, from steam engines to jet engines and modern hybrid systems.  At the Royal School of Applied Engineering and Architecture in Palermo,  early studies on steam engines date back to the mid-19th century, as evidenced by some of the oldest stationary machines and scientific instruments preserved in the museum.  The section dedicated to stationary engines also includes hydraulic machines  such as Francis, Kaplan, and Pelton turbines, reflecting their importance in the evolution of fluid machine technology over time. The museum houses a collection of various automotive engines designed for diverse applications. Most of these engines were acquired for research and teaching activities and have gradually been replaced by more modern models currently in use in the  University of Palermo's engine laboratory.  The museum houses a collection of historically significant aircraft engines.   Some of these engines date back to the early days of aviation, including rotary radial-cylinder engines. Some of the oldest specimens come from Germany and were part of a batch of technical equipment transferred to Italy for research purposes after World War I. Among these engines is the French rotary engine "Le Rhône" 9Jby  and a rare counter-rotating Siemens-Halske Sh.IIIa   engine, representing an advanced step in the evolution of radial-cylinder rotary engines. The museum's collection includes two aircraft: the Lockheed F-104S ASA-M, displayed on the University of Palermo campus, and one of only five surviving FIAT G.59s, which is displayed in a dedicated area of the museum. The FIAT G.59,    designed by Italian aeronautical engineer Giuseppe Gabrielli, was one of the last high-performance aircraft equipped with a piston engine and is considered a symbol of the revival of the post-war Italian aerospace industry. It was developed from the FIAT G.55 Centauro, a World War II Italian fighter aircraft.  The FIAT G.59 was produced by FIAT in the early Additionally, the museum holds a collection of historical scientific instruments used in engine studies, including measuring devices and various types of engine test benches.   On May 31, This recognition is part of the History and Heritage Landmarks program, launched by ASME in 38°06′17′′N 13°20′51′′E﻿ / ﻿38.