QpiAI-Indus is the India's first full stack quantum computer. It is a 25 superconducting qubits quantum computer developed by the Banglore based startup company QpiAI. It was launched on the occasion of the World Quantum Day in the year QpiAI-Indus is the codename of the 25 qubits quantum computer developed by the startup company QpiAI. In the term QpiAI which also signifies for the company name, the letter Q stands for quantum, pi stands for the mathematical symbol π and AI means algorithmic intelligence. The term Indus signifies for the ancient civilization valley in the Indian subcontinent. Thus the etymology of the codename of the quantum computer QpiAI-Indus signifies the legacy of the development of quantum computing in India.[5] The QpiAI-Indus quantum computer features a 25-qubit superconducting processor. It is based on transmon qubits. It is integrated with an HPC datacenter. The integration of the QpiAI-Indus quantum computer with the HPC datacenter enables it hybrid quantum-classical workflows through tools like QpiAI-Opt and QpiAISaaS, combining machine learning with quantum optimization.[3] The success of QpiAI-Indus is deeply tied to the national strategy of India to lead in frontier technologies of the world. It is connected to the India's strategic goals in the field of quantum technologies that includes the advancement of indigenous technology development, establishment of core infrastructure, and cultivation of a skilled workforce in the field.[3][9] According to the company, the development of the QpiAI-Indus quantum computer will support deep-tech innovation across various fields of life sciences, drug discovery, materials science, mobility, climate action, and sustainability.[10] The history of the development of the QpiAI-Indus quantum computer can be traced from the foundation of the company QpiAI in the year The primary hardware components of the QpiAI-Indus quantum computer are Quantum Processing Unit (QPU), Cryogenic System, Quantum Control and Readout Electronics (QpiAISenseTM) and Classical High-Performance Computing (HPC) Integration.[14] The quantum processing unit (QPU) consists of qubits technology and noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) device. The qubits technology in the processor is based on superconducting qubits, specifically Transmon qubits, which is a type of superconducting circuit used for quantum computation. According to the founder cum CEO Dr Nagendra Nagaraja, the T1 and T2 times for the current 25-qubits quantum computer QpiAI-Indus are 30 μs and 25 μs, respectively. These are characterized by the in-house developed quantum control electronics cluster in the company at Bangalore. They are expected to increase to 100 μs soon. Similarly the patented qubit architecture of the company is expect to reach a T1 time of 1 ms by the early This technology-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by adding missing information.