Transclass, class defector (French: transfuge de classe), or social defector (French: transfuge social) refers to an individual who has experienced a major change in social environment during their lifetime.   The concept of transclass was coined by the French philosopher Chantal Jaquet.  In the English translation of her work, Gregory Elliot employs the term class-passing (French: passage (de classe)) instead of defection (French: transfuge).  Similarly, the German translation by Horst Brühmann established the term "class passer" (German: Klassenübergänger) in this context.  Becoming transclass follows a significant passing in social space, meaning for an individual to permeate the boundaries that differentiate social classes.  This passing can occur following marriage, employment, studies, etc. Whether upward or downward, passing necessitates substantial social mobility. The existence of defectors is therefore partly linked to the possibility for individuals to radically change their social environment.  The upward change of social class encounters not only sociological difficulties (see in particular the theses of Pierre Bourdieu), but also psychological difficulties, which were discovered by Vincent de Gaulejac through the concept of class neurosis (French: La Névrose de classe, book published in The concept of transclass was put forward by the philosopher Chantal Jaquet, who herself experienced a transclass trajectory.   Chantal Jaquet published her theory in the book titled "The Transclasses or the non-reproduction" in The concept was the subject of the French documentary "Infrared – The Transclass Challenge" (French: Infrarouge - Le défi des transclasses) broadcast in May According to Laélia Véron and Karine Abiven, class passing has become a “'screen term' that artificially popularizes the idea of social mobility in a world where real opportunities for mobility are limited and where the reversal of hierarchies does not seem likely to happen anytime soon”,  and a “mythical category” rather than a sociological one.  In their book "Betray and avenge. Paradoxes in stories of class defection" (French: Trahir et venger. Paradoxes des récits de transfuge de classe, Sociologist Cédric Hugrée, a researcher at the CNRS specializing in social classes and the sociology of education, explains that there are several discrepancies between the most well-known stories of upward passing and the state of social mobility in France today: "The emphasis is on achieving significant social and geographical mobility, essentially through education bias, and therefore intended for cultural fractions of the upper classes. Finally, for many, these are stories about men. (...) However, upward mobility tends to be small-scale social mobility, which more often involves women. And while degrees play a major role in accessing skilled jobs, there are also other ways of accessing dominant positions (through money, sport, politics, the arts, etc.) that are less widely reported, or are not published in literary collections. From this point of view, we could say that the transclass (French sic.: "transfuge") narrative as a genre is far from having exhausted the reality of social mobility, whereas, according to you, it seems to have exhausted the novelistic." 