In Germany, the term Landarzt (English: country doctor) is colloquially used to refer to a general practitioner who practices in a rural area. This is usually a specialist in general medicine or an internist working as a family doctor. In rural areas, the distances between doctor and patient, as well as between general practitioners and specialists or hospitals, are greater, and the average age of patients is higher. Rural doctors often perform tasks that are handled by specialists in urban areas. They are also the first point of contact in emergencies. Regular home visits are more important than in urban general practices.[1] The term "country doctor" first appeared in Bavaria at the beginning of the 19th century, after the University of Bamberg was dissolved in Germany is experiencing a growing shortage of general practitioners in rural areas, initially in eastern Germany, but now also in other regions. Reasons often cited include the less attractive working and living conditions in rural areas compared to large metropolitan areas, coupled with the aging of the current rural medical profession. The entrepreneurial risk of self-employment deters many young doctors from establishing a practice, as does the difficulty of reconciling self-employment with family planning and the threat of financial penalties for prescribing above-average amounts of medication. This uncertainty is exacerbated by healthcare policy reforms and the resulting lack of predictability in self-employment. By Attempts are being made to counteract the shortage of rural doctors through measures such as scholarships[3] or financial incentives. In At the end of In some regions, particularly in the former East Germany, rural medical care was typically provided through so-called rural outpatient clinics. These were polyclinics with employed physicians, similar to medical care centres , which are gaining in importance. In Australia, the Royal Flying Doctor Service was established for sparsely populated regions.[7] In Sweden , provincial parliaments in the north of the country maintain practices with small medical clinics (Sjukstuga). Similarly, some countries offer or have plans for additional training in "medicine in sparsely populated regions" (Rural Medicine).[8] There are strict rules for filling vacant positions held by contracted physicians, designed to prevent the trading of licenses. Since The Central Institute for Statutory Health Insurance Physicians (Zi) believes that the planned acquisition of statistically surplus physician positions by the Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians (KV) threatens almost 9% of all practices. Even with an increase in the threshold for the level of care from the current 110% to 140%, as planned in the Statutory Health Insurance Strengthening Act (GKV-VSG), around 12,000 physician and psychotherapist positions would still be at risk. Of the physician and psychotherapist positions slated for closure, internists would be affected nationwide, accounting for approximately 37%, and around 19% of psychotherapists would also be unable to find successors. Regionally, the Bavarian KV would lead the way with 2,291 positions to be delisted, followed by the KVs of Baden-Württemberg (1,254) and North Rhine (1,440). To address the shortage of general practitioners, the German Federal Government developed the "Master Plan for Medical Studies